Title: The Spanish Influenza Pandemic of 1918
       An Account of Its Ravages in Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, and the Efforts Made to Combat and Subdue It


Author: Oscar Jewell Harvey



Release Date: March 11, 2021  [eBook #64785]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SPANISH INFLUENZA PANDEMIC OF
1918***


E-text prepared by Turgut Dincer, Barry Abrahamsen, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/0266067.nlm.nih.gov


Transcriber’s note:

      Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores
      (_italics_).





THE SPANISH INFLUENZA PANDEMIC OF 1918


------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration]

                   This Certificate of Merit

                             IS AWARDED TO

                     PHYSICIANS, NURSES, RED CROSS
                        WORKERS _and_ VOLUNTEERS

most of whom sacrificed much time, many of whom sacrificed their health,
and several gave their lives, in the care, nursing and relief of the
stricken people of Luzerne County during the world epidemic, and whose
measures of relief were gratefully received by our people, many of whom
were aliens and strangers, who, understanding little of our language,
nevertheless understood the care and love bestowed upon them at the time
of their great affliction.

History records many instances of epidemics, famines and wars, where
measures of relief were taken for those who were most sorely afflicted,
and the battlefields of our recent war scintillate with heroism.
Individuals, platoons, whole companies and regiments offered themselves
for their fellow men, and future historians will vie with one another in
their endeavor to have live the thousands of heroic incidents in the
great World War, to the end that they may serve as lamps for the feet of
coming generations of freemen.

Nevertheless, civic life—those back home, those who were not inspired in
the presence of the glare and pageantry of military life, those whose
call to duty was heard and as readily performed in no less a measure of
satisfaction—were willing and anxious to take part in the work demanded
of humanity, and were ready to give their all, if need be, for those who
so sorely needed succor.

We are proud of the citizens of Luzerne County—we are proud of the men
and women who live on the fair hills and in the valleys of this
County—and as a people we are most grateful for the services so
willingly offered, the sacrifices so commonly made, and the heroic work
so opportunely accomplished.

This devotion given and shown to their fellow men, to women and to
helpless children, testifies splendidly to a love of country and of
fellow men, as well as to that love of humanity taught by the lowly and
great Nazarene.

This expression, so briefly recorded here, is intended as a testimonial
of, and appreciation for, each individual identified with the care and
relief of the stricken people of Luzerne County. A record is herewith
preserved of the names, so far as known, of those who are thus entitled
to receive the same.

The Committee in whose hands the organization and distribution of relief
was placed, testifies in this brief way to the splendid work
accomplished, and the highly successful co-operative movement of the
State, County, Cities and Towns, and does so, with the thought that
their fellow citizens, when they shall have read of the epidemic as here
set forth, will feel that they are duly bound to express personally, and
publicly, whenever occasion offers, something of their willingness to
give a full measure of approval to those who made sacrifices in the work
so nobly done.

                            GENERAL COMMITTEE
                            Luzerne County Influenza Epidemic, 1918-1919

------------------------------------------------------------------------


THE
SPANISH INFLUENZA PANDEMIC
OF 1918.

An account of its ravages in Luzerne County,
Pennsylvania, and the efforts made
to combat and subdue it.

by

OSCAR JEWELL HARVEY.






Wilkes-Barré, Penn’a,
January,  1920.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 ─The─

                     Spanish Influenza Pandemic of
                                 1918.

                    By Oscar Jewell Harvey.

                                ═══════


EARLY in September, 1918, the United States was invaded by a scourge of
highly infectious and fatal disease, which spread with rapidity
throughout the country. It was pandemic in its nature, and partook of
many of the characteristics of influenza, grip and pneumonia. No one
seemed to know much about the disease or its treatment, and medical
science and public health agencies were alike unprepared to cope with
it.

About all that could be done at the start was to adopt and attempt to
enforce drastic regulations to minimize contagion; but even in view of
these regulations, and when the plague had burst forth in all its
widespread malignity, the country at large seemed slow to awaken to the
enormity of the peril which it faced.

It certainly was a disconcerting fact that, at the very time when vast
numbers of the people in widely-distributed localities had organized
themselves, through the Red Cross and other well-known and efficient
mediums, to fight disease and prevent suffering and death, we should be
smitten with a visitation which caused more casualties and deaths among
the peaceful citizens in the homeland than the deadly missiles and
poisonous gases of the enemy effected among the American Expeditionary
Forces overseas in the great World War.

From September 9 to November 9, according to reports received by the
Federal Census Bureau from forty-six large cities in the United States
having a combined population of 23,000,000 souls, there was a total of
82,306 deaths attributed to the scourge. In a similar period of time, in
the same communities, the normal number of deaths dues to influenza and
pneumonia would have been about 4,000.

In the latter part of September 85,000 cases in Massachusetts alone were
reported; and by the first week in October the disease was prevalent in
nearly all sections of the United States—twenty-three States, from
Massachusetts in the East to California in the West, and from Florida in
the South-east to Washington in the North-west, were experiencing the
mysterious malady. More than 14,000 cases in the military camps of the
country were reported to the office of the Surgeon General of the Army
within one period of twenty-four hours.

Up to January 4, 1919, according to the Census Bureau, the mortality due
to the fatal disease was 115,258 in forty-six cities of the United
States containing one-fifth of the population of the country; while,
according to statistics submitted to the Actuarial Society of America in
July, 1919, 450,000 deaths occurred in the United States in the Autumn
and early Winter of 1918 due to this pandemic disease—which wrought its
greatest havoc among infants and persons in adult working life. The
mortality of males was greater than that of females, while the highest
mortality caused by the disease affected persons of the wage-earning
class—especially those situated in the lowest economic range.

The origin or source of the disease was unknown. Some experts looked
upon it as simply a variety of a well-known disease prevalent, with
occasional outbreaks of violence, for hundreds of years. Others
attempted to identify it with a form of pneumonic plague that has raged
in parts of China for a number of years past—China and its neighboring
lands in Asia forming a vast storehouse of infection from which great
epidemics have swept in waves across and around the globe.

It is an historic fact that, in the early part of 1917 about 200,000
coolies, collected from the northern part of China (where the pneumonic
plague had raged for six or seven years), were sent to France as
laborers, and with them went the germs of the pneumonic plague. Many of
these coolies were captured by the Germans in the Spring of 1918—hence
the outbreak of the plague, at that time, in the German army, where it
is said to have been very serious in its deadly character.

There were some writers of the press who declared that the disease had
been brought into this country in German submarine boats; but when it
was realized that, like a scourge of the Middle Ages, it was sweeping
through Europe—no part of which, civilized or barbarian, was exempt—it
was called by many experts a by-product of the World War.

The manner of the pandemic’s appearance in different countries indicated
that the germs of the disease had been conveyed thither by the currents
of the air. Therefore the theory was broached, that the poison gases,
with which many sectors of the fighting area in Europe and Asia were
drenched, were carried by the winds in every direction, causing the
outbreak of the pandemic in England, Germany, France, Spain, Australia,
Africa and Asia, as well as in North America and some of the South
American countries.

The disease took its deadly toll even in lonely Labrador, in the “silent
North” of the Western Hemisphere, where ice-floes from farther north
fill every harbor of the rock-bound coast; where giant icebergs, miles
in length, mountains in height and acres in extent bar the paths of
ships and steamers. “A land where railroads are unknown, where streets
are never laid nor roads built to connect one settlement with another; a
country where horses and cows are less known than are the rhinoceros and
zebra to the inhabitants of the United States; a region where even
canned milk is a luxury and candy is seldom seen.”

On all the desolate coast of Labrador, extending over eight degrees of
latitude, not a doctor nor a trained nurse, not a hospital nor a
dispensary, not even a health officer, was to be found. Eskimo and
Indian, German and Briton, halfbreed and white, hunter and fisherman,
fell victims to the dreaded scourge, which traveled with rapidity. Whole
settlements were left without a single survivor—the unburied corpses
being devoured by half-starved dogs. This is the story that came out of
the “silent North”—the most gruesome, most awful, tale of disease and
death that the world has heard in many a day!

Following the outbreak of the scourge in Germany it was next heard of in
Spain, where it received the name “Spanish influenza”. This is really a
misnomer, but it has stuck, probably because the disease to which it was
applied was the first epidemic of influenza Spain had ever experienced.
This name accompanied the disease to the United States, where, by some
slangologists, it was early transmogrified into “flu”—by which
appellation it has been pretty commonly designated.

The scourge invaded Pennsylvania about the middle of September, 1918,
simultaneously attacking widely-separated communities. On October 1 the
Department of Health of the Commonwealth issued orders directing the
closing of all moving-picture houses, theaters and places of amusement
in general; that public assemblages be discontinued; that funerals be
privately conducted; that all bar-rooms and wholesale liquor
establishments be closed. The matter of closing schools, churches and
Sunday schools was left to the discretion of local authorities. In
addition, the Department issued proclamations and appeals for hearty
coöperation on the part of the general public in checking the ravages of
the scourge.

In Wilkes-Barré on October 3, 4 and 5 the directions and appeals of the
State Department of Health were promptly and cheerfully complied with
(even clubs and the various fraternal orders and societies observing the
mandates, while the sessions of the Courts of Luzerne County for the
week beginning October 7 were continued and postponed), although on the
first day of the appearance of the disease here only twenty cases were
officially reported.

Owing to the absence of many local physicians and trained nurses in the
military and naval services of the United States, Wyoming Valley Chapter
of the Red Cross issued an appeal on October 3 for trained nurses and
for women with some nursing experience to register with the Chapter for
service in combating the disease here.

Under the date of October 8 the Commissioner of Health of Pennsylvania
issued a circular letter to Department of Health and other physicians
“engaged in the State-wide organization against the Influenza Epidemic,”
in which, among other things, the following information and instructions
were set forth:

    “From close observation of the progress of the pandemic of
    influenza which is now sweeping upon us from the Atlantic
    seaboard, it has been decided by the Governor of this
    Commonwealth, the Commissioner of Health and the Advisory Board
    of the Pennsylvania Department of Health to use the organization
    at hand, and all available organizations that will co-operate to
    the utmost, in an effort to save the lives of our people.
    Accordingly, after careful thought, the following [among other]
    plans have been adopted:

    “The State Department of Health to be in absolute control and
    take full responsibility.

    “The formation of nineteen Epidemic Emergency Districts, with a
    representative of the Department in full charge of each
    district, taking his orders directly from the Commissioner of
    Health and transmitting them to those who answer the call.

    “Appeals to all Health, Patriotic, Civic, Religious, Business
    and Social organizations, such as the Red Cross (graduates in
    elementary hygiene and home care of the sick, or first aid),
    Associated Charities, Boards of Health, Mayors, Councils, County
    Commissioners, Directors of the Poor, Boards of Trade, Church
    Societies, Fraternal Orders, Women’s Clubs, Boy Scouts, Motor
    Messenger Corps, trained nurses, practical attendants, lay
    workers and volunteer automobilists, to lend all possible
    assistance under the direction of the Department.

    “The Adjutant General has placed the entire State Guard, and all
    the equipment of his department, at our disposal for the
    erection of emergency hospitals, furnishing of supplies,
    safe-guarding of property and the maintenance of discipline.

    “Requests for aid from stricken communities should be made to
    the nearest representative of the Department, who will refer
    them to the physician in charge of the Epidemic Emergency
    District. This includes calls for doctors, nurses, aids,
    materials and any other form of relief. The Department will make
    a supreme effort to satisfy all such needs as rapidly as
    possible. However, where these are at hand, they should be
    obtained locally. * * *

    “All attendants should wear masks. * * *

    “Treatment of Influenza and Pneumonia. * * *”

In furthering the foregoing plans and regulations Dr. Charles H. Miner
of Wilkes-Barré, who was at that time, and had been for ten years,
County Medical Inspector of the State Department of Health for Luzerne
County, was appointed on October 8, by the Acting Commissioner of Health
(Dr. B. Franklin Royer), “to take full charge of the organization and
co-ordination of all work in District No. 5,” composed of Luzerne and
Columbia Counties, with headquarters at Wilkes-Barré.

The same day the Acting Commissioner telephoned from Harrisburg to the
County Medical Inspector at Wilkes-Barré, informing the latter of his
appointment as aforementioned, and asking him to request Maj. Gen. C. B.
Dougherty of Wilkes-Barré to aid him in arranging and setting forward
plans for the proper handling of the situation in the 5th District.

General Dougherty responded promptly to the call for his services, and
he and the County Medical Inspector soon concluded, in view of the fact
that the regular and permanent hospitals located in the 5th District
were just about “crowded to their limits” with influenza and pneumonic
patients, and that the new cases reported each day in the various
communities were becoming more numerous, that it would be necessary to
establish and equip several emergency hospitals.

It was decided to establish an Emergency Hospital in Wilkes-Barré
(where, on October 8, sixty new cases of influenza had been reported to
the County Medical Inspector), and the armory of the 9th Regiment,
National Guard of Pennsylvania, located on South Main Street, was
selected for the purpose.

For some time then the 2d Infantry, Pennsylvania Reserve Militia (Col.
S. E. W. Eyer commanding), had occupied the armory as its headquarters.
On October 8 Colonel Eyer turned over the armory to the representatives
of the Department of Health, and immediately, under the direction and
supervision of General Dougherty, the work of thoroughly scrubbing and
cleaning the building from top to bottom was begun and was rapidly
completed. Then the Shepherd Construction Company of Wilkes-Barré began
the erection of four wards on the drill floor of the armory.

Each of these wards was 21×27 feet in area by 10 feet in height, the
walls, or partitions, being constructed of hemlock studding covered with
beaver board. Each ward had a capacity of fifteen cots,[1] whereby ample
air space was allowed for each patient. Considerable plumbing work had
to be installed in order to facilitate the efforts of nurses and
attendants in giving proper care and attention to the hospital patients.
This plumbing work, when completed, represented an outlay of $605.49.
Also, the lighting facilities of the armory not being sufficient, it was
necessary to install additional wiring and lights throughout the entire
building, which was done at an expense of $190.

Footnote 1:

  This arrangement provided accommodations for sixty patients, which,
  later on, were found to be insufficient to meet the demands for
  admission to the hospital; whereupon four more wards of the same
  dimensions and materials were erected. These wards, when completed,
  gave the hospital eight wards with a total capacity of 120 beds. Of
  these eight wards six were used for patients in general as admitted,
  one was used as an isolation ward (where patients in the last stage of
  pneumonia were placed), and one was used as a ward for convalescents.

The basement of the armory was transformed into a commodious and
comfortable dining-room; the kitchen was painted white, made sanitary in
every respect, and its floor was covered with oil-cloth, while gas
ranges were connected and refrigerators were installed. A diet kitchen
(separate from the main kitchen) was established convenient to the main
floor of the armory.

On the evening of October 9, upon invitation of the County Medical
Inspector, the following-named ladies and gentlemen assembled in the
auditorium of the Wilkes-Barré Chamber of Commerce, “for the purpose of
taking steps for combating influenza”: Dr. Charles H. Miner, Dr. S. P.
Mengel, Dr. G. A. Clark, Dr. E. L. Meyers, Dr. Charles Long, Gen. C. B.
Dougherty, Col. S. E. W. Eyer, Lewis P. Kniffen, E. E. Matthews, Anthony
C. Campbell, M. J. McLaughlin, John D. Farnham, M. H. Sigafoos, Maj. E.
N. Carpenter, William H. Conyngham, Frederick E. Zerbey, George J.
Hartman, Hayden Williams, Mrs. C. H. Miner, Mrs. E. Birney Carr and Miss
Josephine Tracy of Wilkes-Barré; Dr. W. B. Stricker, Dr. J. Hughes,
Michael Douk, T. A. Butkiewicz, C. J. Donahey, John Badman and F. H.
Kohlbraker of Nanticoke; R. Alvan Beisel of Hazleton; Mrs. W. A. Lathrop
of Dorranceton; Dr. J. A. Hilbert, Miss Esther J. Tinsley, Dr. S. L.
Underwood and William J. Peck of Pittston; R. A. Mulhall of West
Pittston; Dr. S. B. Arment of Bloomsburg; Dr. D. H. Lake, S. H. Hicks
and W. B. Crane of Kingston.

General Dougherty was called upon to preside, and Hayden Williams,
Secretary of the Chamber of Commerce, acted as Secretary of the meeting.

The County Medical Inspector spoke at great length with respect to the
work already done in the 5th District to combat the pandemic—referring
particularly to the emergency hospital which had been established at
Wanamie, in Newport Township, Luzerne County, and to the preparations
being made for the opening of the Armory Emergency Hospital in
Wilkes-Barré. He stated that he had divided the 5th District into five
sub-districts, with Dr. S. B. Arment in charge of the work in Columbia
County, Dr. J. W. Leckie in charge of the Hazleton sub-district, Dr. W.
B. Stricker in charge of a district extending from Nanticoke south to
the Columbia County line, Dr. S. L. Underwood in charge of a district
extending from the borough of Wyoming to the Lackawanna County line,
while he, himself, in addition to a general supervision of affairs in
the 5th District, had assumed charge of the work in the territory
extending from Wyoming to Nanticoke. He suggested that committees on
automobiles, food, drugs and general hospital supplies should be
appointed.

General Dougherty gave an account of the serious conditions existing at
Minersville and Shamokin in the 3d District, adjoining the 5th District.
Dr. Underwood and Miss Tinsley spoke of conditions in Exeter, Luzerne
County, where nearly 300 cases then existed. They reported that there
were 182 cases in 62 homes; that 98 patients were convalescing; that 10
families were in dire need of help, and that there was a special urgency
for women to help in the house-work of afflicted families.

Dr. Hughes said that there were 400 cases at Glen Lyon and Wanamie in
Newport Township; that sanitary conditions were bad; that there was a
lack of nurses, and that the High School building at Wanamie had just
been converted into an emergency hospital.

Dr. G. A. Clark, head of the Wilkes-Barré City Health Department, stated
that about 200 cases had been reported in the city, and that the
municipality would bear its proper share of the expense incurred in
efforts to check the disease.

Dr. Lake stated that there were 36 cases in Kingston and 40 in
Edwardsville, and that there had been two or three deaths from the
disease. In one home in Edwardsville there were seven cases. He declared
that the closing of the schools had helped somewhat in checking the
spread of the disease, and that considerable good could be accomplished
if Toby’s Creek, which had never been cleaned, were placed in a sanitary
condition.

Dr. Arment stated that conditions in Catawissa, Columbia County, were
bad; that a hospital was needed there, but it was impossible to procure
nurses. Six deaths had occurred thus far in that locality, and the
disease seemed to be spreading. He suggested that the school-houses in
Bloomsburg be converted into emergency hospitals, and reported that the
saloons in Centralia were wide open and doing business as usual.

W. H. Conyngham, representing Wyoming Valley Chapter of the American Red
Cross, stated that his organization had no funds with which to pay
nurses, but that the members of the Chapter stood ready to do anything
in their power to combat the disease.

Dr. Mengel, Chief Surgeon of The Lehigh Valley Coal Company, placed the
nurses of that organization at the disposal of the community, and
suggested that school teachers should be employed to help in the work of
caring for the sick.

Mrs. E. Birney Carr reported that the Canteen Service of the Wyoming
Valley Chapter of the Red Cross would render all the assistance
possible, while Mr. McLaughlin, one of the Commissioners of Luzerne
County, gave assurance that the County would render any assistance
possible to help stamp out the disease.

The Secretary of the Wilkes-Barré Chamber of Commerce volunteered the
assistance of the Chamber’s staff in handling all details of the work
connected with the campaign. Dr. Charles Long suggested that an effort
be made to secure financial and other assistance from the Board of
Directors of the Central Poor District of Luzerne County.

Anthony C. Campbell, Esq., County Fuel Administrator, told of the
serious conditions with respect to the mining industry in the 5th
District, and declared that the output of anthracite coal was being
seriously affected by the pandemic. On motion of Mr. Campbell it was
then unanimously voted: That such emergency hospitals as the County
Medical Inspector deemed necessary be established, that those in charge
of the work incident to combating the influenza-pneumonia scourge should
call upon the Board of Directors of the Central Poor District, County
officials and the various municipal officers in the 5th District for
financial assistance in defraying such expenses as may be necessarily
incurred in carrying on their work, and that the County Medical
Inspector be given any and all assistance required.

The meeting then adjourned, and within a day or two thereafter the
County Medical Inspector announced the appointment of various committees
“to coöperate with the State Department of Health in the 5th District
with respect to the influenza epidemic,” as follows:

GENERAL COMMITTEE.—To have general supervision over the hospitals
established. To provide ways and means, and secure appropriations and
financial aid from the several municipalities. All funds raised, except
State funds, to be placed in the hands of the Treasurer of the General
Committee. All expenditures to be approved by the General Committee and
its Chairman.

Maj. Gen. C. B. Dougherty (representing the Susquehanna Collieries Co.),
_Chairman_; Hayden Williams (representing the Chamber of Commerce),
_Secretary_; M. J. McLaughlin (County Commissioner), Wm. H. Conyngham
(Red Cross), Lewis P. Kniffen (City Council), R. Nelson Bennett (City
Council), Wm. C. Shepherd (Chamber of Commerce), J. L. Reilly (Central
Poor District), Dr. S. P. Mengel (Lehigh Valley Coal Co.), Dr. G. A.
Clark (City Health Board), Dr. E. L. Meyers (School Board), Miss Mary
Trescott (School Board), F. H. Kohlbraker (Susquehanna Collieries Co.),
Dr. J. W. Geist (Lehigh and Wilkes-Barré Coal Co.), Frederick E. Zerbey
(Kingston Coal Co.), Samuel T. Nicholson (Vulcan Iron Works), M. H.
Sigafoos (Hazard Manufacturing Co.), Fred. H. Gates (City Clerk), and
Fuller R. Hendershot (County Controller).

EMERGENCY HOSPITAL COMMITTEE.—This committee to have general charge of
the establishment of emergency hospitals and direct their conduct and
care, including arrangements for and maintenance of subsistence for
patients and help.

Dr. S. P. Mengel of Wilkes-Barré, _Chairman_; Drs. Lewis H. Taylor, W.
S. Stewart and L. A. Sheridan of Wilkes-Barré, Dr. Cohen of Berwick, Dr.
H. B. Wilcox of Kingston, Dr. H. Whitney of Plymouth, Dr. H. J. Lenahan
of Pittston, Dr. Jesse Hughes of Nanticoke, Dr. J. H. Bruner of
Bloomsburg, and Dr. Walter Lathrop of Hazleton.

CANTEEN RELIEF COMMITTEE.—This committee to have charge of the
preparation of food, and the preparation of the same for transportation
to outside patients at their homes—this transportation to be provided by
the Motor Transportation Committee.

The ladies of the Red Cross Canteen Service are to compose this Relief
Committee, with Mrs. E. Birney Carr as Chairman.

ARMORY HOSPITAL COMMITTEE.—This committee, under the direction of the
Emergency Hospital Committee, to have charge of the care and maintenance
of sanitary conditions of the Armory, and to provide for the disposal of
refuse.

Col. S. E. W. Eyer, _Chairman_; Capt. Robert R. Harvey, Lieut. Charles
E. Trein, Lieut. Robert D. Raeder, Harry W. French, and Wayne Canfield.

The medical staff for the Armory Hospital to consist of: Drs. W. Clive
Smith, D. S. Kistler, Parke Sickler, Charles Long, John T. Howell, Allan
C. Brooks, E. J. Flanagan, J. B. Tobias, Maurice B. Ahlborn, Herbert B.
Gibby and Walter B. Foss, and their duties being to act as aids to the
Superintendent of the Emergency Hospital, and to accept assignments for
service from time to time as the demands may require—the schedule of
this service to be arranged by the Chairman of the Emergency Hospital
Committee, with a minimum demand on the time of the Staff Physicians,
and only as the exigencies required.

MOTOR TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE.—This committee to have charge of the
motor transportation for the transfer of nurses from hospitals and
patients to and from the homes of the sick. Under this committee a
sub-committee of men to be organized to arrange for the transportation
of food to homes.

Mrs. W. A. Lathrop, _Chairman_; Mrs. Lawrence B. Jones, Mrs. Robert A.
Quin, Miss Caroline Marcy, Stephen Pettebone and Frank F. Matheson.

NURSES’ AID COMMITTEE.—This committee to have charge of the selection
and recruiting of all trained nurses, Red Cross nurses and volunteer
nurses for the Emergency Hospitals, and visiting nurses for homes.

Mrs. Charles H. Miner, _Chairman_; Mrs. J. Pryor Williamson, Mrs.
Charles P. Elliott, Mrs. Paul Bedford, Mrs. Wm. H. Conyngham, Mrs.
Charles P. Hunt, Mrs. E. Byron Strome, Mrs. E. B. Wagner, Miss C. L.
Best, Miss Ethel Sturdevant, Miss Margaret Bevans, Miss Georgia
Grossman, Miss Clara Treglawn, Miss Ruth Williams, Miss Corrigan, Miss
Ruth Benscoter and Miss Isabelle Cairns.

DRUG STORE COMMITTEE.—This committee to organize the drug stores, and
have them provide and keep in stock such medicines and medical goods as
will be required for the Emergency Hospitals. Also, to secure and
provide a stock of drugs and supplies for the Emergency Hospitals.

Louis Frank, _Chairman_; Edward H. White, Lieut. Charles E. Trein and
Henry W. Merritt.

LUZERNE COUNTY COÖPERATION COMMITTEE.—This committee, representing the
municipal governments and the Boards of Health in their respective
districts, to coöperate with the General Committee by organizing in
their towns a house to house census, and report all cases of influenza
and sickness to the Chairman of the General Committee, and to aid and
coöperate in every way to prevent the spread of the disease. This
committee to be subject to the call of the General Committee for
conference, as well as the other committees. Community Captains to
report to Community Chairmen, the latter to report to District Chairmen,
and they to report daily to the General Chairman of the Coöperation
Committee. The latter to report daily to Dr. Miner, representing the
State Department of Health.

Percy A. Brown, Wilkes-Barré, _General Chairman_; Hayden Williams,
Wilkes-Barré, _General Secretary_; Dr. Joseph Dougherty and Frank
McQuown, Ashley; William G. Rowett and Clifford Edwards, Courtdale;
Louis Jacobs and William Mundy, Exeter; William Evans and William A.
Wallace, Forty Fort; Dr. D. H. Lake and Rush Trescott, Kingston; John
Doran and Edward Lawler, Larksville; George Knarr and R. J. Blair,
Luzerne; Dr. F. E. Davis and William Oldfield, Nanticoke; O. O.
Eisenhower and Harry Brown, Dorranceton; James Doran, Parsons; Dr. H.
Templeton and George E. Gwilliam, Plymouth, and Dr. Milton Barton,
Plains.

General Headquarters—Greater Wilkes-Barré Chamber of Commerce, Miners
Bank Building, Wilkes-Barré.

LUZERNE COUNTY DISTRICT CHAIRMEN.—_District No. 1_, Henry W. Ruggles,
Dorranceton; _District No. 2_, H. L. Freeman, Plymouth; _District No.
3_, G. D. Stroh, West Pittston; _District No. 4_, Joseph M. Stark,
Hudson; _District No. 5_, Rev. F. Kasaczun, Sugar Notch; _District No.
6_, E. B. Wesley, Nanticoke; _District No. 7_, Harry A. Schmoll,
Hazleton.

_District No. 1_, composed of the boroughs and hamlets of Courtdale,
Dallas, Dorranceton, Exeter, Forty Fort, Kingston, Luzerne, Pringle,
Shavertown, Swoyerville, Trucksville, West Pittston, Wyoming and West
Wyoming, and the townships of Kingston, Franklin, Exeter and Dallas.

_District No. 2_, composed of the boroughs of Edwardsville, Larksville,
Plymouth and Shickshinny, and the townships of Fairmount, Hunlock,
Huntington, Jackson, Lake, Lehman, Plymouth, Ross, Salem and Union.

_District No. 3_, composed of the city and township of Pittston, and the
boroughs of Avoca, Dupont, Duryea and Hughestown.

_District No. 4_, composed of the boroughs of Laflin, Miner’s Mills,
Parsons and Yatesville, and the townships of Jenkins and Plains.

_District No. 5_, composed of the boroughs of Ashley, Laurel Run,
Nuangola, Sugar Notch and Warrior Run, and the townships of
Wilkes-Barré, Fairview, Bear Creek, Buck, Wright, Slocum and Denison.

_District No. 6_, composed of the borough of Nanticoke, the village of
Macanaqua, the borough and township of Nescopeck, and the townships of
Conyngham, Dorrance, Hollenback, Newport and Slocum.

_District No. 7_, composed of the city of Hazleton and all territory
contiguous thereto.

The following rules, governing the “operation of community organizations
and the duties of each organization unit,” were promulgated:

    “1. COMMUNITY CHAIRMAN.—Shall act as Chairman of the Executive
    Committee and be responsible for the operation of each unit.
    Receive reports daily from all subordinates, and report daily to
    the Chairman of the District in which the community is situated.

    “2. EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.—To meet and work only under direction
    of the Community Chairman. This committee shall assist the
    Community Chairman in carrying out all rules and regulations.

    “3. SECRETARY.—To have some one constantly on duty at the
    Emergency Station. Keep a record of all cases and any other
    information required. Prepare a daily report for Community
    Chairman, also receive all calls for nurses, canteen service,
    medical attention when physicians are overworked, and be in a
    position at all times to furnish accurate information. It is
    preferred that a school teacher be engaged to assist the
    Secretary.

    “4. EMERGENCY STATION.—To be centrally and conveniently located.
    To be equipped with a telephone for use by the Secretary and
    other officials. To be open during business hours.

    “5. COMMUNITY CAPTAINS.—Under the direction of the Community
    Chairman and Executive Committee a Captain shall be appointed
    for each community. In case of an unusually long street, the
    number of Captains for said street may be increased. Captains
    will make a daily tour of their streets, and report daily to the
    Community Chairman, through the Secretary at the Emergency
    Station, the number of new cases, deaths and discharged cases.
    Captains will also note sanitary conditions and conditions in
    general, and aid in eliminating any condition that may cause a
    spread of disease. Captains will also report any cases needing
    medical attention or a nurse.

    “6. NURSING BUREAU.—To be located at the Emergency Station and
    be under the direction of Red Cross workers. Here a record
    should be kept of every woman who volunteers as a nurse or
    nurse’s assistant. From this Bureau should also be supplied
    gowns and masks to protect nurses when they go into the homes of
    the sick.

    “7. CANTEEN SERVICE.—To distribute food for the sick in homes
    where food is needed. Care should be exercised to see that this
    service is not abused. The Canteen should be established
    preferably in a church kitchen, and here should be prepared soup
    or broth to be distributed in jars or pails to the doors of the
    homes from which calls have been received.

    “8. AUTOMOBILE SERVICE.—Secure one car or truck daily for
    service at the Canteen, and other machines to carry nurses and
    physicians to homes of patients when necessary.

    “9. PUBLICITY BUREAU.—To assume charge of distributing leaflets
    in different languages, disseminate general information, and
    assist through publicity in bringing about enforcement of all
    health regulations.


                  “MISCELLANEOUS GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS.

    “Impress every member of the community organization with the
    seriousness of the situation, and make each one responsible
    toward having people obey all instructions.

    “Remember that it is easier to prevent an epidemic than to stop
    one when conditions become dangerous.

    “Don’t frighten people about the situation, but constantly
    prevail upon them to be careful in not exposing themselves to
    disease or spreading it.

    “Permit no public gatherings or large groups on street corners,
    in stores, etc.

    “Permit no public funerals, and have a police or health officer
    attend all funerals to enforce the law in this respect.

    “Let ‘Safety First’ be the motto of all people.

    “It is especially requested that all schools and churches be
    closed.”

In pursuance of the resolution adopted at the meeting held in the
Chamber of Commerce on October 9, as aforementioned, Dr. Miner gave
directions for the establishing of emergency hospitals at the
following-named places—in addition to those already arranged for at
Wanamie and in the Armory at Wilkes-Barré: Catawissa, Exeter, Hazleton,
Dupont, Nanticoke and Plains.[2]

Footnote 2:

  At this time the regular, or permanently established, hospitals
  located in the 5th District were as follows: Wilkes-Barré City, Mercy,
  Wyoming Valley Homœopathic and Riverside Hospitals in Wilkes-Barré;
  Nesbitt West Side Hospital, Dorranceton; Pittston Hospital, Pittston;
  Berwick Hospital, Berwick, Columbia County; State Hospital of the
  Middle Coal Field of Pennsylvania, Hazleton; State Hospital,
  Nanticoke; Bloomsburg Hospital, Bloomsburg, Columbia County.

On October 10 the first emergency hospital was opened, in the Central
High School building at Wanamie, with Dr. William H. Corrigan physician
in charge and Miss Emily G. Jones, Graduate Nurse, as chief nurse. The
same day the emergency hospital at Catawissa was opened, with Dr. S. B.
Arment physician in charge and Miss Hannah C. Breisch, Graduate Nurse,
as chief nurse. On October 11 the third emergency hospital was opened,
in the High School building at Exeter, with Dr. James Dixon physician in
charge and Miss Jessie Cunningham and Mrs. Ernest W. Hogg, Graduate
Nurses, as chief nurses.

Dr. Elmer L. Hinman, having been sent to Wilkes-Barré by Dr. Royal S.
Copeland, Commissioner of the Health Department of the city of New York,
reported to the County Medical Inspector for duty on October 12, and was
assigned to the Wanamie Emergency Hospital to assist Dr. Corrigan.

At this time it was estimated that there were at least 1,000 influenza
and pneumonia cases, reported and unreported, in Wilkes-Barré—new cases
appearing at the rate of nearly 100 per day. The Wilkes-Barré City
Hospital refused, because of lack of room and nurses, to receive any
more cases. Nurses and doctors everywhere were overworked, and the
situation at Glen Lyon (in Newport Township) and in Hazleton and its
vicinity was appalling.

In the afternoon of October 12 a meeting of Chairmen of committees and
Division Chairman was held with the County Medical Inspector at the
rooms of the Chamber of Commerce, when it was decided that trucks should
be secured for the purpose of delivering food daily to the homes of the
sick, where such service was needed. Whereupon Percy A. Brown and Frank
F. Matheson each offered trucks for this purpose. It was suggested that
Mrs. P. J. Higgins of Wilkes-Barré should be placed in charge of the
cooking at the Armory canteen—the necessary arrangements for this
service, however, to be left in the hands of the Canteen Committee.

Dr. Mengel suggested that a telegram be sent to the proper authorities
at Washington, urging them to leave here, during the progress of the
epidemic, all Red Cross nurses now in this vicinity. General Dougherty
reported that he had communicated with the Hon. A. Mitchell Palmer and
other Government officials at Washington relative to having army
surgeons sent here from Camp Crane, Allentown, Pennsylvania, and he had
been assured that ten officers of the Medical Department would be sent.

Dr. S. M. Wolfe of Wilkes-Barré, who had recently returned from
Massachusetts, where he had assisted in combating the epidemic, told of
the various organized methods and plans pursued in dealing with the
disease in that State.

Mr. William J. Ruff, Cashier of the Luzerne County National Bank,
Wilkes-Barré, was then elected Treasurer of the General Committee.

At the close of this meeting General Dougherty telegraphed to Maj. Gen.
Rupert Blue, Surgeon General, U.S.A., Dr. H. A. Garfield, U. S. Fuel
Administrator, and Miss Carrie Noyes, Director of Field Nursing,
American Red Cross, at Washington, D. C., as follows:

    “The following Red Cross nurses have been called to leave for
    service on Tuesday, October 15: Miss Edith Evans, Miss Elsie
    Banker and Mrs. Lena Krum of Wilkes-Barré; Miss Hazel Smith of
    Tunkhannock, Pa., and Miss Bessie Evans of Kingston, Pa. The
    influenza situation in Wyoming Valley is of such a serious
    nature, and there is such a dearth of nurses, that, as Chairman
    of the General Committee of Wyoming Valley (whose efforts are
    being directed toward the stamping out of this pestilence, in
    order to conserve the lives of our citizens and thus maintain
    the production of anthracite coal, which is now seriously
    affected by the prevailing sickness), I appeal to you to direct
    these nurses to remain here to take up their duties in emergency
    hospitals now being established. I trust that this appeal will
    be fully appreciated by you. We are fearfully short of nurses as
    well as doctors. We can use a great many physicians and nurses.”

On October 13 the following-named medical officers from Camp Crane
arrived at Wilkes-Barré, and were assigned to duty by Dr. Miner, as
noted: Capt. E. L. Hendricks, U. S. Marine Corps, and Lieut. C. F.
Bahler, to Glen Lyon; Lieut. Joseph Goldstone, U. S. Marine Corps, to
Bloomsburg; Lieut. G. T. Meek to Exeter, and Lieut. J. a.m. Aspy to
Hazleton.

At a meeting of the General Committee held in the auditorium of the
Chamber of Commerce on Tuesday, October 15, General Dougherty presented
a report relative to conditions at Shamokin and Minersville (in the 3d
District), where there were 4,000 cases of the “flu”. Col. Eyer reported
on the work being done at the Armory to fit it for hospital purposes,
and Dr. Miner stated that the Armory Emergency Hospital would be ready
for the reception of patients at noon on the following day.

The Rev. John J. McCabe, of St. Joseph’s R. C. Church, Georgetown, told
of conditions in Wilkes-Barré Township, where, he said, there were 80
cases of the disease. Dr. Hughes stated that there were about 585 cases
in Newport Township and vicinity, and Richard Sheridan reported that
there were possibly over 200 cases in Nanticoke.

On motion of the Rev. Mr. McCabe the Chairman named Dr. C. H. Miner, the
Rev. J. F. Jedlicka and Dr. E. L. Meyers as a committee to confer with
the Controller and Commissioners of Luzerne County, and the Directors of
the Central Poor District, for the purpose of securing financial aid in
fighting the epidemic. Controller Hendershot, who was present, stated
that he would do everything in his power to co-operate with the General
Committee in its work. James L. Reilly, Secretary of the Central
District Poor Board, who was present, stated that he felt sure the Poor
Board would co-operate with the Committee.

Frederick E. Zerbey, Superintendent of the Kingston Coal Company,
offered the use of the ambulances of that company to convey patients
from the west side of the river.

General Dougherty stated that the State would pay for doctors, nurses,
tents, cots, blankets, sheets, etc., employed and used in combating the
epidemic, but that all other service would have to be paid for with
funds derived from other sources.

On October 16 the Hazleton Emergency Hospital was opened in the building
of St. Gabriel’s High School, Hazleton, with Lieut. J. a.m. Aspy
physician in charge and Miss Ruth B. Rae, Graduate Nurse, from the
Department of Health, as chief nurse. (Later, Miss Rae was stricken with
the “flu” and was succeeded as chief nurse by the Mother Superior of St.
Gabriel’s, who was a professional nurse. On October 25 Lieutenant Aspy
returned to Camp Crane, and was succeeded by Dr. J. W. Leckie as
physician in charge at Hazleton.)

On October 12 the Armory Emergency Hospital at Wilkes-Barré was ready
with four wards for the reception of patients. Lack of nurses, however,
delayed the opening of the hospital until Wednesday, October 16, when,
with Capt. E. L. Hendricks, U.S.M.C., as physician in charge, and Mrs.
J. Pryor Williamson of Wilkes-Barré, Graduate Nurse, as chief nurse, the
doors were opened at one o’clock p.m. for the reception of patients.
During the afternoon six female and five male patients from
Wilkes-Barré, Nanticoke, Parsons and Miner’s Mills were received, and on
the following day eleven males and seven females were received from
Wilkes-Barré, Edwardsville, Plymouth, Miner’s Mills, Maltby, Nanticoke
and Forty Fort.

The sixth Emergency Hospital in the 5th District was opened on October
17 in the Pulaski School building at Dupont, Luzerne County, with Dr. W.
S. Helman of Avoca as visiting physician and Miss Herman, Graduate
Nurse, as chief nurse. (Dr. Helman was succeeded on November 9 by Dr.
James S. Dixon, and Miss Herman was succeeded on November 19 by Miss
Bessie Fadden.)

The seventh Emergency Hospital was opened on October 17 in the
Washington School building at Nanticoke, Luzerne County, with Dr. Elmer
L. Hinman in charge and Miss Olwen Williams, Graduate Nurse, as chief
nurse. (Dr. Hinman returned to New York City on October 26, and was
succeeded by Lieut. C. E. Yates.)

On October 17 two medical students, Messrs. J. A. Post and W. R.
Stewart, of the University of Buffalo, reported to the County Medical
Inspector at Wilkes-Barré to help out with the work of the 5th District.
Mr. Stewart was assigned to assist Dr. Corrigan at the Wanamie Hospital,
and Mr. Post was assigned to the Exeter, and subsequently to the Plains,
Emergency Hospital.

The same day the following-named Army Surgeons arrived at Wilkes-Barré
and were assigned to the Hazleton District: Captains Davenport and
Danfort to work at Jeddo; Captain Brown at Cranberry; Captain Wroth at
Lattimer and Major Wyer in Hazleton. On October 19, however, all these
Surgeons were ordered to return to Camp Crane, Allentown.

On October 18 a largely-attended meeting of the General Committee was
held, with General Dougherty, Chairman, presiding. The latter outlined
the objects and purposes in view with respect to the emergency hospitals
which had been established, stating that only patients who could not
receive proper attention at their homes should be sent to the hospitals.
He also set forth the fact that there was a very great shortage of
doctors and nurses in this District, and called upon Miss Nellie G.
Loftus, the State nurse in charge of the nurses in this section, to make
a statement as to conditions here. This she did, setting forth that
there were thirty graduate nurses in the 5th District, five or six of
whom were not in active service on account of illness. There were also
eleven practical nurses in the District, but at least fifty more
graduate nurses could, and should, be placed in service immediately.

Mr. W. C. Shepherd then made the following motion, which was adopted:

    “It is the sense of this meeting that all patriotic citizens
    will, in every case where possible so to do, release nurses from
    their private employ for the general good of the community. It
    is their patriotic duty to do this during the present grave
    emergency.”

Mr. Percy A. Brown, Chairman of the Coöperation Committee, stated that
the territory in Luzerne County had been divided into forty
sub-districts, and that he had arranged to have an organization in each
sub-district. Thirty-two of the forty organizations had already reported
to him. He suggested that leaflets, containing brief and simple rules
for avoiding influenza and for the care of the sick, be printed in
several foreign languages, and widely distributed.[3]

Footnote 3:

  In pursuance of this suggestion a six-page leaflet was subsequently
  prepared and printed in English, Italian and three other languages,
  and was well distributed throughout the District.

Mr. Brown also suggested that a fund be created from which money could
be drawn to be used in paying some one in each sub-district to look
after and report upon the sanitary and health conditions in that
particular locality.

Anthony C. Campbell, Esq., Fuel Administrator for this section of the
State, stated that he had received reports from various large
coal-mining companies, which had enabled him to prepare a statement
showing that from 28,000 to 30,000 tons of coal had been lost to the
industry on account of the influenza.

On motion of Mr. W. C. Shepherd it was voted that all communities in
this District be requested to organize committees on the plan endorsed
or recommended by the State Board of Health. In pursuance of this motion
Chairman Dougherty appointed Wm. C. Shepherd, Dr. Charles H. Miner, Dr.
S. P. Mengel, Dr. E. L. Meyers, A. C. Campbell and Percy A. Brown a
committee (“Ways and Means Committee”) to prepare a draft of the plan to
be used for the guidance of the several communities in this matter.

In pursuance of a motion made by Dr. Walter Davis the Chairman appointed
Dr. Davis, Dr. D. H. Lake, Dr. J. W. Geist and Miss Nellie G. Loftus a
committee to report with respect to the systematic treatment of “flu”
patients.

On motion of Wm. H. Conyngham it was voted: “(1) that an effort be made
to retain here the five nurses who are now in this community, but who
have been ordered to return to Washington on October 26; (2) that the
Chairman of the General Committee communicate by telegraph with the
proper officials at Washington, expressing our desire to have retained
here, until the situation is improved, the army doctors who are now in
the field, or that other doctors be sent to take their places, and that
as many as can be furnished be sent.”

On October 20, at a meeting of the General and District Chairmen, in
conjunction with the members of the Ways and Means Committee, the latter
presented a plan for the organization of outlying communities. This plan
was forthwith adopted and ordered to be printed and distributed among
the officials of the various communities.[4] Fuel Conservator Campbell
reported that he had telegraphed to Federal Fuel Administrator Garfield,
urging him to use his influence to have the army doctors then here kept
here.

Footnote 4:

  This was subsequently done, in the following form:

  PLAN OF COMMUNITY ORGANIZATION FOR THE EPIDEMIC EMERGENCY.

  1. Community Chairman (President of Board of Health).
  2. Executive Committee, consisting of:
        A. Board of Health.
        B. Burgess and member of Borough or Township Council.
        C. Mine Superintendent and representative of labor union.
        D. Principal of schools.
        E. Red Cross Worker.
        F. Member of Council of National Defense.
        G. Clergyman.
        H. Prominent Citizen.
        I. Local Physician—principally in advisory capacity.
  3. Secretary.
  4. Emergency Station.
  5. Community Captains.
  6. Nursing Bureau.
  7. Canteen Service.
  8. Automobile Service.
  9. Publicity Bureau.
  10. Miscellaneous.

At this time the influenza and pneumonia conditions were “appalling” in
certain localities in Luzerne County. At Glen Lyon, as well as at
Georgetown in the township of Wilkes-Barré, the situation was very
serious. An average of about 75 new cases per day in Wilkes-Barré was
being reported, while all the emergency hospitals in the District were
without sufficient help.

On October 22 new cases in Wilkes-Barré to the number of 120 were
reported, while conditions in Glen Lyon, Nanticoke, Wanamie and some
other places in the 5th District were “desperate”. On this date Dr.
Miner and the Chairman of the General Committee received the following
communication, copies of which were immediately transmitted by them to
the various emergency organizations in the 5th District.

                                                  “October 20, 1918.

    “From: The Commissioner of Health of Pennsylvania.

    “To: All concerned with Problem of Nursing during the present
    Epidemic of Influenza.

    “Subject: Plan of Organization and Instructions. (General Order
    No. 2.)

    “As it is not yet fully realized that the present epidemic
    afflicting us in these war times has caused the greatest need,
    and at the same time is accompanied by the greatest scarcity, of
    graduate nurses that has ever occurred, it is necessary to form
    a plan which may be adapted to any situation, as one community
    after another becomes involved:

    “1. Graduate nurses must be used in such a way that their
    services be of assistance to the greatest number. This may be
    done by calling first upon all partially trained attendants, Red
    Cross workers, and then lay helpers, or any intelligent persons
    who are able to assist, and who will faithfully follow
    instructions. These latter must be instructed carefully in the
    essentials for treating patients, protecting themselves, and
    preventing the spread of infection, and be directed to make a
    simple record of their work each day, while the graduate nurses
    must move about rapidly to cover as much territory as possible
    if the cases are in private homes or in small groups,
    supervising the work of subordinates, instructing these
    subordinates, and following up their work. If the graduate is
    assigned to a hospital, the same plan should be used, _i. e._,
    nurses or lay helpers detailed to small groups of patients, with
    the graduate in charge. Thus an active graduate and subordinates
    who obey orders with military precision get actual results which
    cannot be obtained by attempts to furnish trained nurses to
    individual families or in quantity to hospitals.

    “2. It is imperative that the lives and health of physicians,
    nurses and lay workers be conserved for service to the vast
    number afflicted. Accordingly in each hospital (emergency,
    tent-hospital or otherwise) or in each community which has been
    organized against the epidemic, a system should be devised to
    apportion the time and labor of all workers as equally as
    possible, according to the character of their work. All
    precautions against infection must be constantly observed, _e.
    g._, the wearing of gowns which cover the entire body; masks
    made by applying eight layers of surgical gauze, or two of
    butter cloth, to the convex surface of a wire tea-strainer about
    four inches in diameter, which is molded to fit the face from
    above the tip of the nose to below the point of the chin and
    secured to the head by tapes, (gauze changed every hour and
    boiled half an hour, sun dried and used over again); by the use
    of antiseptics, including careful cleansing of the hands after
    handling patients, before eating, etc., and care in destroying
    by burning or sterilizing infected material.

    “3. Strict discipline (semi-military) is essential for saving
    time and insuring accuracy in receiving and executing orders.
    All personal differences and likes and dislikes must be
    absolutely subordinated to the general need. Those in charge of
    others should exercise judgment in issuing orders to other
    subordinates, being careful to avoid anything which may be
    unnecessary or a repetition. Subordinates will observe
    instructions of their superiors without hesitation or argument.
    Courtesy at all times on the part of every one concerned will
    result in reaching most quickly the goal upon which our every
    effort is bent—the checking, if possible, of _this great public
    disaster_ and minimizing its crippling effect and death toll.

    “4. Requests for aid from stricken communities should be made to
    the nearest representative of the Department of Health, who will
    refer it to the Physician in charge of the Emergency District.
    This includes calls for doctors, nurses, aids, materials and any
    other form of relief. The Department will make a supreme effort
    to satisfy all such needs as rapidly as possible. However, where
    these are at hand they should be obtained locally.

    “5. The best emergency hospital is the tent hospital, where the
    patient may obtain fresh air for twenty-four hours and receive
    sunlight by being hauled out into the company streets during the
    day. Wooden shacks or lean-tos (like those used in T. B.
    treatment), the walls of which may be raised by hinges and
    pulleys to admit the air and sunlight, are excellent. Buildings
    without balconies or porches should not be used unless there is
    adequate room or window space. Open air schools are almost
    ideal; next to them are modern high schools with large grounds
    about them. Visitors should be excluded, except relatives of
    dying patients, who should wear gowns and masks during the
    visit.

    “6. Encourage the people of the community who wish to do
    something for the sufferers but cannot nurse them, to make
    masks, gowns and other supplies, also broths or other forms of
    nourishing food. Traveling kitchens or food delivered from a
    community kitchen by motor cars are of great assistance to
    stricken families. A County Committee should be formed for the
    purpose of investigating and promptly relieving distress,
    financial or otherwise. This committee could enable wage earners
    to remain at their employment.

    “7. All existing agencies (local government, organizations,
    societies, orders, etc.) should be co-ordinated so that there be
    no uncertainty or confusion as to what is needed and how to meet
    the need and no waste of personnel or repetition of instructions
    or starts upon unnecessary errands.

    “8. In each district, which may include several Counties, there
    is a physician in full charge of the district, with permanent
    headquarters. There is also a supervising nurse of the district,
    whose headquarters should be the same as the District Chief’s,
    unless an emergency should make another arrangement desirable.
    All other Department officers are subordinates to these two
    representatives of the Medical and Nursing service respectively.
    Reports by wire or ’phone are required daily at 1 p.m. from
    Supervising Nurse, District Chief, and from each County
    Inspector at the Epidemic Headquarters, Harrisburg. These
    officers should arrange that all of their subordinates in the
    district report to them at a convenient hour prior to this time.

    “9. It should be borne in mind that the District Chief and
    Supervising Nurse of each district are responsible for their
    entire district and cannot be spared too long in any one
    locality. Their movements will depend upon exigencies which may
    arise and orders from this office.

                                                 “B. FRANKLIN ROYER.
                                    “Acting Commissioner of Health.”

On October 23 the eighth Emergency Hospital in the 5th District was
opened in the Maffet Street School building at Plains, Luzerne County,
with Miss May Conlon, Graduate Nurse, as chief nurse.

On October 25 the following-named United States Army medical officers,
who had been on duty in the 5th District, returned, under orders, to
Camp Crane: Lieut. C. F. Bahler, Lieut. Joseph Goldstone, Lieut. G. T.
Meek and Lieut. J. a.m. Aspy. Capt. E. L. Hendricks, being ill at Hotel
Sterling, remained here some days longer. Upon the abovementioned date
General Dougherty, Chairman of the General Committee, telegraphed to
Gen. Peyton C. March, Chief of Staff, U.S.A., as follows:

    “By systematic organization and effort we have been endeavoring
    to combat Spanish Influenza in Luzerne County, with its
    population of 350,000 souls. We had 300 registered physicians in
    the County, of whom 115 have gone into the military service. We
    has over 12,000 cases [of influenza] in the County, and have
    established, in addition to the regular hospitals, seven
    emergency hospitals. But three medical officers of those who
    were sent here from Camp Crane now remain. Six thousand mine
    workers are ill with the disease, thus reducing the daily output
    of anthracite coal 15,000 tons, or at the rate of 300,000 tons
    per month. We are informed that you have 4,000 medical officers
    in training at Camp Greenleaf. We must have twenty-five
    physicians sent here at once. Please give us this number of
    physicians, as the spread of the disease is increasing, and we
    must have medical assistance. Our doctors are exhausted.”

At a meeting of the General Committee held October 26 Chairman Dougherty
reported that the Commissioners of Luzerne County had appropriated
$25,000. to be used in defraying the expenses incurred in combating the
epidemic in Luzerne County.[5] It was the general opinion of the members
of the committee present that this money should not be distributed among
the various communities entitled to it until the end of the epidemic. It
was pointed out, however, that several communities had already made
applications for needed funds. It was finally decided that a committee
composed of the Chairman and three other members of the General
Committee should prepare, and report at a subsequent meeting, a plan for
the proper expenditure of the County appropriation.

Footnote 5:

  About this time the City Council of Wilkes-Barré made a special
  appropriation of $5,000. to be used in fighting the “flu” in the city.
  This sum was in addition to the regular annual appropriation for the
  city’s Bureau of Health.

Colonel Eyer reported on conditions at the Armory Emergency Hospital,
and stated that many of the patients who had died there were practically
in a dying condition when received into the hospital. At 9:20 o’clock
p.m. the Committee adjourned and proceeded to the Lehigh Valley Railroad
station, where the following-named United States Army medical officers
were met upon their arrival from Camp Crane, Allentown, Pennsylvania,
for epidemic work in Luzerne County, and were assigned to duty as herein
noted.

Capt. H. W. Dessaussure (in command) and Lieuts. E. J. Burke, E. Z.
Brunner, L. H. Hills and J. B. McGuinness, to report to Dr. J. W. Leckie
at the Hazleton Emergency Hospital; Capts. E. B. Chenowith and Evan S.
Evans, U.S.M.C., to the Wilkes-Barré Armory Hospital; Lieuts. Robert
Funston and A. C. Hall to report to Dr. Stricker at Nanticoke; Lieut.
Frank F. Davis to report to Dr. Stricker for service at Glen Lyon;
Lieut. Leroy Fredericks to report to Dr. Stricker for service at the
Wanamie Emergency Hospital; Lieut. H. R. Lipscomb to be physician in
charge at the Plains Emergency Hospital.

On this date, according to a report submitted by the County Medical
Inspector to the State department of Health, the number of influenza and
pneumonia patients undergoing treatment in the various hospitals in the
5th District were as follows: Hazleton Emergency, 22; Exeter Emergency,
70; Dupont Emergency, 9; Wanamie Emergency, 55; Wilkes-Barré Armory
Emergency, 46; Catawissa Emergency, 8; Plains Emergency, 19; Nanticoke
Emergency, ?; Hazleton State, 75; Nesbitt West Side, 14; Wyoming Valley
Homœopathic, 15; Nanticoke State, 13; Mercy, 30; Wilkes-Barré City, 64;
Bloomsburg, 19; Berwick, 26. (Riverside Hospital, Wilkes-Barré, had
received no “flu” patients.)

On October 28 new cases in Luzerne County were reported as follows:
Edwardsville, 40; Wilkes-Barré City, 98; Wilkes-Barré Township, 16;
Larksville, 19; Plymouth Borough, 50; Plymouth Township, 12; Laflin, 10;
Miners Mills, 29; Parsons, 18; Plains Township, 109; Ashley, 13; Hanover
Township, 35; Laurel Run, 2; Sugar Notch, 2; Warrior Run, 19; Courtdale,
6; Dallas, 2; Dorranceton, 16; Forty Fort, 18; Luzerne, 31; Swoyerville,
16; Wyoming, 14; West Wyoming, 8; Avoca, 5; Duryea, 4; Dupont, 1; Exeter
Borough, 1; Hughestown, 11; Pittston, 20; West Pittston, 4; Pittston
Township, 4; Dorrance, 3; Kingston, 32; Hazleton, 27; Weston, 48;
Conyngham Borough, 3; Freeland,18; Lattimer,11; St. John’s,1; Sandy
Run,11; Upper Lehigh,6; West Hazleton,72; Seybertsville,2;
Neuremburg,22; Nanticoke, 64; Nescopeck,3—making a total of 956 new
cases in Luzerne County.

On October 28 a joint-meeting of the General and Coöperation Committees
was held in the rooms of the Wilkes-Barré Chamber of Commerce.

Chairman Brown stated that the biggest problem with which the
Coöperation Committee had to deal was that respecting nurses. He further
stated that something should be done immediately to establish
organizations in those communities. He advocated more pay for nurses,
and said he believed that a sufficient number of nurses could be
secured, whereby better progress would be made in combating the scourge.

After some discussion it was voted that in Luzerne County the pay of
graduate nurses should be fixed at $120 per month, and that of practical
nurses at $75 per month. It was also voted that all nurses should be
under the control of Miss Loftus and the General Committee.

It was decided to recommend the placarding of all homes in which
influenza existed in all cities, boroughs and first-class townships in
Luzerne County. Also, that all matters of publicity concerning the “flu”
in Luzerne County should be handled by the Chairman of the Coöperation
Committee.

Following the adjournment of this meeting the following “Publicity
Bulletin” was issued.

    “A meeting of all District Chairmen and members of the Ways and
    Means Committee was held this morning in the auditorium of the
    Chamber of Commerce. Reports received showed that in certain
    outlying boroughs and townships officials charged with the
    protection of the lives of their constituents, as well as the
    general health of their respective communities, are placing the
    lives of their people below their selfish aims by playing
    politics. It was decided that, unless the said officials take
    immediate steps to bring about proper organization and
    protection of their respective communities, action will be taken
    at once to have them removed and their places filled by people
    with a sense of honor, and who will give to their communities
    the protection to which they are entitled.

    “It was also decided that there is a great need for field
    nurses, and that the sooner a sufficient number of such nurses
    can be secured, the sooner the epidemic will be checked in our
    community. It was decided to pay graduate nurses $120. per month
    and practical nurses $75. per month. All nurses will be in
    charge of Miss Nellie G. Loftus, who is stationed at the Wyoming
    Valley Dispensary, 184, South Washington Street, Wilkes-Barré.

    “It was also brought to the attention of the meeting that
    newspaper reports secured from people in boroughs and townships
    are not accurate, and that the same are an injustice to the said
    communities. In one community, where it was reported that
    thirteen deaths had occurred, correct figures show that the
    deaths numbered only three. Therefore, it was decided that the
    General Committee should be responsible for publicity given out
    only by the Chairman of the Coöperation Committee, to whom are
    sent all official reports from communities.

    “It was also decided to recommend to the officials of all
    cities, boroughs and first-class townships in Luzerne County the
    placarding of homes in which influenza exists.

                                           [Signed] “PERCY A. BROWN,
                            “Chairman of the Coöperation Committee.”

Reports to the Coöperation Committee on October 31 showed 709 new cases
of influenza and 67 deaths theretofore unreported in forty-eight
communities of Luzerne County—indicating a decrease in the number of new
cases, but no decrease in the number of deaths.

On November 4 only seventy-three new cases in Wilkes-Barré were
reported, and there were very gratifying indications that the scourge
was subsiding in most parts of Luzerne County. It was estimated that
10,000 coal miners in the County were idle because of the “flu.”

A well-attended meeting of the General Committee was held in the
auditorium of the Wilkes-Barré Chamber of Commerce in the evening of
November 6, with Chairman Dougherty presiding and Hayden Williams as
Secretary. The County Medical Inspector, in reporting on conditions in
his District, stated that Berwick in Columbia County and Plains in
Luzerne County were still having a serious time with the epidemic.
Nanticoke, he said, had also been hard hit. He stated that in Newport
Township, Luzerne County, 249 people had died from the influenza. He
declared that, while conditions in general were improved, new cases and
deaths would likely continue to occur during the next three or four
weeks.

The County Medical Inspector took advantage of this occasion to declare
that too much could not be said about the good work accomplished by the
general organization in Luzerne County, which had been the salvation of
the entire County. Without it the loss of life would have been
considerably greater, and many communities would have felt the full
force of the epidemic. He then read a communication from the Acting
Commissioner of Health, which he had received a short time previously,
in part as follows:

    “Where churches and schools have been closed during the epidemic
    of influenza, great care should be practised at the time of
    removing restrictions. Many children have been kept completely
    out of danger during this dangerous period, and to open too soon
    and run the chance of bringing them into contact with persons
    who have recently recovered, and who may perhaps be carriers,
    may again bring fresh outbreaks of the disease, particularly
    among school children.

    “Then, too, thousands of public, private and parochial school
    teachers have been actively engaged in nursing, and these
    teachers should have a few days of rest—preferably a week—and
    ought to be absent from work at the bedsides of the sick for
    that period of time before returning to the schools or to
    crowded services.

    “I would urge that you take these things into consideration,
    and in conference with the School Boards arrange for resuming
    sessions, so far as possible, when two-thirds of the children
    in any school district are ready to return from homes where no
    one has suffered with influenza for a period of seven days.
    Where possible, medical or nursing supervision would be
    advisable—especially for a few days after opening the schools.

    “I would suggest that, so far as practicable, the resumption of
    school work should take place about midweek, and of Churches and
    Sunday Schools on the Sunday following. This will bring children
    gradually together, and will avoid the overcrowding apt to occur
    in Sunday Schools if these schools were first opened. It is not
    necessary to tell you that fifty per cent. of the Sunday Schools
    are conducted in buildings not as well ventilated as are the
    public schools.”

It was stated, in this connection, that over 2,000 school teachers
throughout the State had been active in helping to fight the epidemic.

Upon motion of Percy A. Brown it was voted to publish the letter of the
Acting Commissioner of Health, and to urge all school boards and Sunday
Schools not to reopen their schools without first consulting the Boards
of Health of their respective localities, to learn whether or not the
resumption of school sessions would cause a further spread of the
epidemic.

Chairman Dougherty, referring to the work of the various committees in
this locality during the epidemic, stated that, while talking at
Harrisburg a few days previously with Dr. Royer, the Acting Commissioner
of Health, the latter informed him that the epidemic organization in
Luzerne County was “_the finest in the country, and the people of this
County deserve great credit for the work done_.” General Dougherty then
read a letter which he had just received from the Acting Commissioner,
in part as follows:

    “I am very greatly indebted to you for the splendid story of the
    Emergency hospitals, and to note what a tremendous amount of
    public interest your committee has aroused. It is only by such
    community service that it has been possible to save the number
    of lives of miners that we have saved during this public health
    drive. Too much credit cannot be given to your local committee,
    and I shall see to it that the press gives the local people a
    great share of credit.”

Wm. C. Shepherd expressed the opinion that the General Committee should
communicate to the various communities in the County the suggestions of
the State Department of Health with reference to the lifting of the
quarantine ban wherever it had been imposed.

Percy A. Brown, Chairman of the Coöperation Committee, reported that
while the latest reports received showed there had been a general
falling off of the disease, the daily average of new cases was about
seven per district, compared with a recent average of ten per district.
He stated that he expected to send out on the ensuing day, to every
community chairman in Luzerne County, a questionnaire asking for certain
information regarding the total number of cases and of deaths that had
occurred since the beginning of the epidemic, together with a complete
record of all workers, paid and volunteer. Later on, he said, he hoped
to have a meeting of the various chairmen, with a view to forming an
organization to prevent a recurrence of dangerous conditions during
future epidemics.

County Controller Hendershot suggested that Chairman Brown’s
questionnaire should include a call for information with respect to the
number of children orphaned by the epidemic. He said that if he could
secure such information he would take it to Harrisburg and endeavor to
secure additional aid from the State for the care of such children. He
said he believed that the State would increase the Mothers’ Pension Fund
appropriation in order to handle such cases.

Wm. C. Shepherd declared that the gathering of various statistics, as
proposed, would bring together valuable information for use in preparing
for publication a history of the epidemic. These facts, in his judgment,
should be printed and preserved for the benefit of future generations.
In this connection the Rev. Father McCabe suggested that it would be
wise not to take the census of the various communities until the
epidemic was thoroughly stamped out. Dr. S. P. Mengel also stated that
it would be unwise to take a census until the epidemic was over; and, as
to the final data to be secured by a census, he said that only those
facts furnished by the medical authorities should be accepted, inasmuch
as no one else was competent to determine whether or not a person
alleged to have been ill with influenza had suffered from that disease
or something else.

The County Medical Inspector told of what had been done at Pottsville,
Schuylkill County, towards taking care of the children made orphans by
the epidemic. He also stated that he would like to see a community
census taken, and a permanent record made of all persons who had helped
in combating the epidemic in Luzerne County.

Dr. E. L. Meyers, a member of the School Board of the City of
Wilkes-Barré, told of the good work performed by school teachers during
the epidemic and in various public movements, and suggested that, when a
census of community conditions should be made, the aid of school
teachers and school superintendents should be enlisted in the work. He
then offered the following resolution, which was unanimously adopted.

    “_Resolved_, That the Chairman of the Coöperation Committee be
    instructed to appeal to the various school superintendents in
    Luzerne County for assistance in the making of a community
    census, for the purpose of ascertaining desired information in
    connection with the Influenza Epidemic, as well as for the
    protection of all communities against future epidemics. The
    questionnaire to be used by the school teachers in the making of
    the said census to be prepared by a committee of physicians to
    be named by the Chairman of the General Committee.”

In pursuance of this resolution Chairman Dougherty appointed Drs. E. L.
Meyers, S. P. Mengel, J. W. Geist and G. A. Clark a committee to prepare
the proposed census questionnaire.

The Chairman then called attention to the necessity of devising a plan
for the distribution of the money appropriated by Wilkes-Barré City and
Luzerne County for epidemic work. He called especial attention to the
fact that it was not the intention of the General Committee to expend
the money in a haphazard manner, but that only such bills as the
respective communities should be properly relieved of would be paid. The
greatest care should be exercised in arranging a plan that, when worked
out, would give a square deal to all the communities and effect a
general feeling of satisfaction.

Thereupon, on motion of Percy A. Brown, it was voted that the Chairman
of the General Committee should name a committee to be known as the
“Committee for the Distribution of Funds for the Care and Relief of
Influenza Victims”; which committee should devise and carry out a plan
for “the distribution of the funds provided for the expenses of
emergency hospitals and the relief of victims of the Influenza Epidemic
in Luzerne County.”

It was further voted that this committee, before deciding upon a plan of
distribution, should procure as much information as possible relative to
the number of cases in each community, as well as the expenses incurred
by the several communities.

In response to an inquiry made by the County Medical Inspector, it was
decided that the rates of pay for nurses, agreed upon at the
joint-meeting of the General and Coöperation Committees held on October
28, should, in each instance, run from the beginning of the nurse’s
service.

In pursuance of the action of this meeting Chairman Dougherty
subsequently appointed the following-named gentlemen to compose the
Committee for the Distribution of Funds. William H. Conyngham, Dr.
Charles H. Miner, John O’Donnell, James M. Stack, Fuller R. Hendershot,
Harry W. Ruggles, William J. Ruff, Percy A. Brown, William C. Shepherd
and Gen. Charles B. Dougherty. At a later date the members of the
committee met and organized by selecting William C. Shepherd Chairman,
William J. Ruff Treasurer, and L. K. Eldridge Secretary.

On Thursday, November 7, the General Committee came to an understanding
with the various municipal, school and Church authorities that it would
be safe to re-open saloons and bar-rooms on Saturday, November 9,
churches on Sunday, November 10, moving-picture houses, theaters,
dance-halls, etc., on November 11, Sunday Schools on November 17, and
public, parochial and private schools (which had been closed on October
5) on November 18.

On November 5 the Catawissa Emergency Hospital (which had been
established in a private residence) was closed. According to the final
report received from the hospital there had been on the staff six
physicians (including the chief), five Graduate Nurses and two
orderlies. Thirty-nine patients had been admitted, of whom two died.

Hazleton Emergency Hospital was closed on November 8. The staff had
consisted of two U.S.A. medical officers, five orderlies and enlisted
men, one Graduate Nurse for five days, and a number of volunteer
nurses—most of whom were school teachers. Dr. J. W. Leckie was in charge
when the hospital closed. The total number of patients admitted to this
hospital was 109, of which number 55 had pneumonia and 54 influenza. One
influenza patient and forty-two pneumonia patients died—fourteen dying
within twenty-four hours after their admission to the hospital.

Exeter Emergency Hospital was closed on November 11, at which time Dr.
James Dixon was the physician in charge. There had been nine Graduate
Nurses and three practical nurses on the staff, three volunteer nurses
and, for a part of the time, three orderlies. Influenza patients to the
number of 90 and pneumonia patients to the number of 79 (making a total
of 169) were admitted, of which number 42 pneumonia patients died—13
dying within twenty-four hours after their admission to the hospital.

Nanticoke Emergency Hospital was closed on November 13, at which time
Lieut. C. E. Yates, U.S.A., was the physician in charge, assisted by
Miss Olwen Williams, Graduate Nurse. The staff had comprised four
physicians (including the Chief), three medical officers, U.S.A., three
Graduate Nurses, forty-three volunteer nurses, one medical student and
seven orderlies. Thirty influenza and 121 pneumonia cases had been
admitted, and forty-one of the latter had died—fourteen dying within
twenty-four hours after their admission to the hospital.

Wanamie Emergency Hospital was closed on November 14, at which time the
physicians in charge were William H. Corrigan and Lieut. L. W.
Frederick, U.S.A., assisted by W. R. Stewart, a medical student. Nine
Graduate Nurses and five Practical Nurses (at different times), eleven
volunteer nurses, thirty nurses’ aids, thirty-one Sisters of Mercy,
seven orderlies and one medical student were members of the staff at one
time and another. Thirty influenza patients and 157 pneumonia patients
were admitted to the hospital. Forty-nine of the latter died—twenty-one
dying within twenty-four hours after their admission.

The Wilkes-Barré Armory Emergency Hospital was closed on November 14. As
previously noted, this hospital was opened for the reception of patients
on October 16, with the following staff: Capt. E. L. Hendricks, U. S.
Marine Corps, physician in charge; Mrs. J. Pryor Williamson of
Wilkes-Barré, a Graduate Nurse, as chief nurse; fifteen Graduate Nurses,
nine aids and two civilian orderlies.[6]

Footnote 6:

  During the existence of the hospital the total number of physicians
  (including the Chief) on the staff was five; the number of Graduate
  Nurses was fifteen; the number of volunteer nurses was twelve (three
  Graduates and nine aids); the number of orderlies was ten, and of
  enlisted men, fifteen.

The preparing and serving of food for the patients and the entire staff
of the hospital were in the hands of the Red Cross Canteen service,
under the capable direction of Mrs. E. Birney Carr. For the cooking and
baking of the food the services of Mrs. P. J. Higgins were obtained, and
under her expert directions the quality and quantity of food served were
beyond criticism.

A system was early inaugurated for the purchasing of materials and
supplies, under which system all materials and supplies needed, with the
exception of food, were purchased by Lieut. Charles A. Trein (of the 2d
Infantry, Pennsylvania Reserve Militia), acting as Purchasing Agent.
Under this system accounts rendered were promptly approved by Col. S. E.
W. Eyer and ordered to be paid, with little confusion and no elaborate
system of bookkeeping. With this system, and the coöperation of the
medical officers and Graduate Nurses in charge, everything moved along
with smoothness and regularity.

On October 24 Captain Hendricks was recalled to his unit at Camp Crane,
Allentown, for oversea’s duty. Unfortunately he was taken ill when about
to leave Wilkes-Barré, and for three days thereafter was confined to his
bed at the Hotel Sterling. On October 25 Lieut. Joseph Goldstone, U. S.
Marine Corps, was assigned to the Armory Hospital and remained in charge
until October 31, when he, too, was recalled to Camp Crane to report for
oversea’s duty. Thus the hospital was deprived, for the second time, of
a faithful, conscientious, tireless worker.

On October 28 Mrs. J. Pryor Williamson, a Red Cross worker in
Wilkes-Barré on extended leave, who was serving as chief nurse at the
Armory, was recalled to Washington. With her knowledge of hospital work,
her energy and her untiring efforts, she had, in her twelve days of
service at the Armory, placed the hospital upon a working basis which
left no room for doubt as to her ability and good judgment with respect
to the matters under her supervision. Mrs. Williamson was ably succeeded
at the Armory by Miss Antoinette Schofield, Graduate Nurse, as nurse in
charge, which position she held until the closing of the hospital.

On November 1 Capt. Evan S. Evans, U.S.M.C., was assigned to the
hospital, and remained as physician in charge until November 14, when
he, too, was recalled to Camp Crane. Captain Evans, with his sunny
disposition and jovial smile, made many friends among the patients and
others with whom he came in contact.

On November 14, with only three patients as inmates, it was decided to
close the hospital. Therefore, two of the three patients were
transferred to the City Hospital, and one was transferred to the Mercy
Hospital. At that time an average of about thirty new cases of the
pandemic were being reported each day in Wilkes-Barré. In consequence,
the Armory Hospital was left intact for a period of about two weeks; but
as, during that time, no new cases were received, the wards were
dismantled and the building was fumigated and finally closed to the
public on December 7.

All articles of food remaining on hand at the closing of the hospital
were equally divided and donated to the Wilkes-Barré City Hospital,
Mercy Hospital and the Wyoming Valley Homœopathic Hospital. Other
articles of use and value, after being properly fumigated, were turned
over to the City of Wilkes-Barré authorities for use in the city’s
Hospital for Contagious Diseases, then in course of construction.

The total number of patients admitted to the Armory Emergency Hospital
was 192, of which number 132 were males and 60 were females. Ninety-four
of the patients were pneumonia cases, and of these sixty-six died. Three
died from influenza. Thirty-five patients died within twenty-four hours
after their admission to the hospital. The largest number of patients
admitted in one day was eighteen—on October 17. The largest number of
patients in the hospital on any one day was 62; the largest number of
deaths on any one day was seven, and the largest number discharged on
any one day was fourteen. Eighty-six of the patients were under thirty
years of age.

Of the 192 patients received into the Armory Emergency Hospital 102 were
from Wilkes-Barré; 20 from Edwardsville; 22 from Swoyerville; 7 from
Ashley; 6 from Plymouth; 5 each from Kingston and Miners Mills; 4 each
from Askam, Parsons and Forty Fort; 3 from Maltby; 2 each from
Larksville, Sugar Notch, Nanticoke and Buttonwood; 1 each from
Plainsville and Dorranceton.

The Plains Emergency Hospital was closed on November 18, at which time
Lieut. H. R. Lipscomb, U.S.A., was the physician in charge, and Miss May
Conlon, a Graduate Nurse, was the chief nurse. Five different physicians
(not more than one at any given time) had served on the staff, together
with four Graduate Nurses, three practical nurses, six volunteer nurses,
one medical student, three orderlies and three enlisted men. Fifty
patients were admitted (31 influenza cases, 18 pneumonia cases and one
case of croup), and of this number thirteen of the pneumonia patients
died—three of them within twenty-four hours after their admission to the
hospital.

The Dupont Emergency Hospital was closed on December 3, at which time
Dr. James S. Dixon was the physician in charge, and Miss Bessie Fadden,
Graduate Nurse, was the chief nurse—she having succeeded Miss Herman on
November 19. There had been on the staff four Graduate Nurses, five
practical nurses (who worked part of the time), two sanitary
detachments, and a number of Sisters of the Bernardine Order who served
as volunteer nurses. One hundred and three patients were admitted to the
hospital, of whom 83 were influenza and 20 were pneumonia cases. Twelve
of the latter died—five of them within twenty-four hours after their
admission to the hospital.

The following information, concerning influenza and pneumonia cases
treated in some of the permanent hospitals located in the 5th District,
has been derived from official reports made to the County Medical
Inspector, covering the period from October 1, 1918, to January 1, 1919.

Wyoming Valley Homœopathic Hospital: Total number of influenza cases,
68; pneumonia cases, 55; total number of deaths, 27.

Mercy Hospital: Total number of influenza cases, 133; pneumonia cases,
131; total number of deaths, 87—including 22 who died within twenty-four
hours after their admission to the hospital.

Wilkes-Barré City Hospital: Total number of cases, 457, comprising 223
influenza cases and 234 influenza-pneumonia cases. Two hundred and
thirty-four of the number were male and 223 were female patients. The
total number of deaths was 135. Of the members of the hospital staff, 72
contracted pneumonia at the hospital, and four of them died.

Pittston Hospital: Total number of influenza cases, 67 (males, 26;
females, 41); pneumonia cases, 32, of which 13 terminated fatally.

State Hospital at Hazleton: Total number of influenza patients, 275;
pneumonia patients, 216, of whom 113 died.

Berwick Hospital: Total number of influenza cases, 113; pneumonia cases,
25; total number of deaths, 16.

On November 18 the number of cases of influenza-pneumonia in
Wilkes-Barré had increased to such an alarming degree that the municipal
authorities imposed another quarantine ban, closing all amusement houses
and prohibiting public assemblages. Eleven days later this ban was
removed, although the daily average of new cases of influenza and
pneumonia totaled about thirty-five. The public schools of the city,
however, having been closed about two months, were not re-opened until
December 4, although at that time about eighteen new influenza cases a
day were being reported in Wilkes-Barré. Conditions in other parts of
the County seemed to be improving.

On December 15, owing to the large increase in the number of influenza
cases in Wilkes-Barré, the municipal authorities ordered the closing of
all schools except the City High School and private schools of a
corresponding grade. Also, children under fourteen years of age were
forbidden to attend theatres and motion-picture shows, to ride in public
conveyances and to visit stores. The sessions of Sunday Schools were
also directed to be discontinued. The epidemic seemed to be particularly
prevalent among children.

One hundred and four cases of influenza in Wilkes-Barré were reported on
December 17, and the next day the municipal authorities imposed
additional quarantine restrictions, the chief of which was that persons
in quarantined houses—excepting physicians, and others given special
permits—should not enter or leave such houses.

On December 19 the General Committee held a meeting, which was attended
by the Health Officers of Wilkes-Barré, Dorranceton and Hanover.
Chairman Brown of the Coöperation Committee reported that up to that
date there had been 2,872 deaths from influenza and pneumonia in Luzerne
County, 345 of which had occurred in Wilkes-Barré. The County Medical
Inspector briefly outlined the situation in the County, and stated that
in some cases officials were not reporting the true conditions in their
localities.

At a meeting of the General Committee held on December 21 the County
Medical Inspector stated that the conditions in the various communities
in the 5th District were such that the Acting Commissioner of the State
Department of Health was not inclined to order any further quarantine
ban, unless requested to do so by the authorities of the respective
communities. Dr. Clark, of the Bureau of Health of Wilkes-Barré,
reported that the situation in the city during the last four days had
been better than for some time previously—only 35 new cases having been
reported. He said that so far in the month 1,020 cases had been
reported, while in November only 825 cases had been reported. More
children and fewer adults were being attacked by the disease.

Mayor Kosek stated that he was averse to crippling the business of the
community, but he felt that everything possible should be done to stamp
out the epidemic. He said he was in favor of giving the matter
considerable publicity, and urged that officials in the outlying
communities should be asked to coöperate with the city authorities in
the enforcement of regulations.

Resolutions were then adopted to the effect that any further plan for
fighting the epidemic, which should be adopted, should be enforced
vigorously until all danger had passed; that places of amusement should
be closed to children; that public funerals and overcrowding at public
gatherings should be prevented. The following resolution, offered by Dr.
S. P. Mengel, was then unanimously adopted:

    “_Resolved_, That this committee endorses the rules and
    regulations adopted by the Board of Health of the City of
    Wilkes-Barré, and that we ask for the strict enforcement of the
    same, and that we pledge coöperation in aiding the authorities
    to bring about such enforcement; and further, that we call upon
    the entire public, as well as the officials of all communities
    in Luzerne County, for their coöperation in reducing the number
    of cases of influenza by obeying to the letter all rules and
    regulations adopted by the Wilkes-Barré Board of Health; and we
    also ask the coöperation of every newspaper in Luzerne County in
    bringing this matter to the attention of the people.”

On December 23 Mayor Kosek of Wilkes-Barré made an official announcement
to the people of the city, to the effect that, if they would not
voluntarily observe the reasonable quarantine regulations which had been
adopted by the city authorities, he would impose a quarantine that would
be the most far-reaching and absolute that had yet been ordered, and
this without regard to what interests might be thereby affected.

At this time the officers of the Bureau of Health of the city were
firmly opposed to the lifting of the ban with respect to public dances,
cabarets, Sunday School sessions, and other public assemblages during
the approaching holiday season. However, about the first of January,
1919, the ban against moving-picture houses was lifted, and on the 10th
of the month the remaining restrictions of the quarantine were removed,
and Sunday Schools and the public and private schools of the city
resumed their sessions.

The following table, compiled from official records and reports,
indicates the total number of known cases of influenza and pneumonia,
and the total number of deaths therefrom, that occurred in Luzerne
County from October 1, 1918, to January 1, 1919.


                Community                  Total   Total
                                           Cases  Deaths

                Ashley Borough               391      43

                Fairview Twp.                150       8

                Avoca Borough                250      26

                Courtdale Borough             32       8

                Conyngham                    300      42

                Dallas Borough                25       5

                Dorranceton Borough          357      80
                  (including Westmoor)

                Duryea Borough               704      65

                Edwardsville Borough         609     121

                Exeter Borough               950     120

                Forty Fort Borough           138      14

                Freeland Boro. and         1,567     104
                  Foster Twp.

                Hughestown Borough           169       7

                Jeddo Borough                471      18

                Kingston Borough             660      68

                Kingston Twp.                 25       4

                Laflin Borough                84       0

                Larksville Borough           594      82

                Laurel Run Boro.             150       4

                Luzerne Borough              520      44

                Pringle Twp.                 157      14

                Miners Mills Borough         546      40

                Nanticoke Borough          1,772     299

                Slocum Twp.                   63       6

                Hanover Twp.                 359      46

                Newport Twp.               3,700     192

                Nescopeck Twp.               165      17

                New Columbus Borough          30       4

                Parsons Borough              575      49

                Plymouth Boro. and         1,559      95
                  Plymouth Twp.

                Shickshinny Borough          275      25

                Sugar Notch Borough          450      22

                Wright Twp.                   13       0

                Dorrance Twp.                 62       4

                Swoyerville Boro.          2,000      81

                Warrior Run Borough          132      15

                West Hazleton Boro           479      53

                West Pittston Boro           685      53

                Exeter Twp.                    0       1

                West Wyoming Boro.           144      22

                White Haven Borough          182       3

                Wyoming Borough              325      30

                Yatesville Borough             0       0

                Hazleton                   3,012     338

                Hazle Twp.                   790      77

                Butler Twp.                   74       6

                Pittston, Pittston Twp.    1,366     261
                  and Jenkins Twp.

                Wilkes-Barré               4,817     521

                Wilkes-Barré Twp.            531      60

                Bear Creek Twp.                5       2

                Plains Twp.                1,629     133

                Bucks Twp.                     0       0

                Nuangola Borough               0       0

                                            ────    ────

                Grand totals              34,043   3,332


The following table sets forth the number of cases of influenza and
pneumonia treated, and the number of deaths occurring, in the Emergency
Hospitals in Luzerne County:

                Wanamie                      187      49
                Exeter                       169      42
                Hazleton                     109      43
                Wilkes-Barré Armory          192      69
                Nanticoke                    151      41
                Dupont                       103      12
                Plains                        50      13
                                            ────    ────
                Grand totals                 961     269


The following detailed statement indicates very clearly the character
and amount of the work done for nurses and patients by the members of
the Red Cross Canteen of Wyoming Valley Chapter during the pandemic:


              Number of portions served    October  1,983

                                          November  3,714

                                          December  3,974

                                                     ────

                                             Total  9,671

              Number of quarts of soup     October  2,158
                distributed

                                          November  3,946

                                          December  2,456

                                                     ────

                                             Total  8,560

              Number of quarts of milk     October     50
                distributed

                                          November    560

                                          December    805

                                                     ────

                                             Total  1,415

              Number of lunches packed     October    532
                for nurses

                                          November    917

                                          December    203

                                                     ────

                                             Total  1,652

              Number of quarts of lemon    October     20
                syrup served

                                          November     18

                                                     ────

                                             Total     38

              Number of quarts of lemon    October     51
                jelly served

                                          November     40

                                                     ────

                                             Total     91

              Number of quarts of          October      2
                pineapple juice served

                                          November      2

                                                     ────

                                             Total      4


Desserts were distributed in which the following articles were used:


                    Milk                qts.  2,013
                    Gelatin             qts.    295
                    Eggs                doz.    335
                    Lemons              doz.    42½
                    Rice                lbs.     15
                    Vanilla             qts.      9
                    Grape Juice      bottles      4
                    Raspberry Juice   bottle      1
                    Pineapple           cans      4
                    Peaches              can      1
                    Cocoa              boxes      4
                    Junket Tablets     boxes      2
                    Cornstarch         boxes    155
                    Tapioca            boxes    141
                    Gelatin            boxes    202
                    Lemon Jello        boxes     12
                    Sugar               lbs.    316
                    Ice Cream           qts.     56


                  Vegetables used    October qts.   40
                  in soup

                                    November qts.   40

                                    December qts.   40

                                                  ────

                                       Total qts.  120

                  Rice used in       October lbs.   26
                  soup

                                    November lbs.   40

                                    December lbs.   50

                                                  ────

                                       Total lbs.  116

                  Barley used in     October lbs.   10
                  soup

                                    November lbs.    3

                                    December lbs.   10

                                                  ────

                                       Total lbs.   23

                  Spaghetti used     October lbs.    5
                  in soup

                                    November lbs.   46

                                    December lbs.   50

                                                  ────

                                       Total lbs.  101


               Number of influenza masks              200
               given out (approximately)

               Clothing                      Garments  50


    Soup was distributed in Wilkes-Barré and outlying districts, and
    was sent to the Visiting Nurses’ rooms and to the Home for
    Friendless Children. Corresponding amounts of desserts were sent
    out in Wilkes-Barré, and outlying districts, and to the Home for
    Friendless Children. Jellies and marmalades were donated in
    large quantities, and were sent out with the soup and desserts.
    The sum of $500.00 was donated for free milk for influenza
    patients.

    Although Troop Trains were being served during the month of
    December, the Canteen continued the work incidental to the
    epidemic. From Canteen Headquarters large quantities of soup,
    custards and milk were distributed to individuals and families
    in the city and outskirts. Three thousand nine hundred and
    seventy-four people were served. Two thousand four hundred and
    fifty-six quarts of soup were distributed; 167 quarts, with
    corresponding quantities of custard, were sent to Georgetown,
    and 13½ quarts to the Visiting Nurses’ rooms for their lunches.
    Eight hundred and five quarts of milk were distributed. Two
    hundred and three lunches were packed for volunteer nurses on
    duty in the stricken homes. Twenty-four quarts of ice cream were
    distributed on Christmas Day. Desserts were distributed in which
    the following were used: 739 quarts milk, 84 quarts gelatin,
    117½ dozen eggs, 10½ dozen lemons, 4 quarts vanilla, 47 boxes
    cornstarch, 53 boxes tapioca, 33 boxes gelatin, 12 boxes lemon
    jello, 85 pounds sugar.

At a meeting of the Greater Wilkes-Barré Chamber of Commerce held
December 10, 1918, with President Philip R. Bevan in the chair and
Hayden Williams Secretary, a very full discussion took place with
respect to the large number of children in Luzerne County who had been
orphaned by the influenza scourge (2,390, as noted on page — n?,
_ante_)—creating a condition demanding the serious consideration of
every citizen of the County. Thereupon the following resolution was
adopted:

    “_Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to look into this
    matter, and make recommendations at a subsequent meeting of the
    Chamber.”

Pursuant to this resolution President Bevan appointed a committee as
follows: William C. Shepherd, _Chairman_, Percy A. Brown, C. F. Brisbin,
John N. Conyngham, Charles E. Clift, William H. Conyngham, Fuller R.
Hendershot and John D. Farnham. This committee met on January 3, 1919,
and after careful deliberation unanimously decided that, before any
consideration could be given to a definite plan for the permanent relief
of influenza orphans, it would be necessary to form a general committee
drawn from various sections of the County of Luzerne. Chairman Shepherd
declared that, whatever plan of relief should be adopted, it should
apply to the entire County. He said, also, that it would have to be
decided whether or not any of the children could be taken care of by
existing charitable organizations, or whether a special institution
would have to be established.

Mr. Hendershot, and others present, raised the question as to whether or
not any of the children could be taken care of by the Mothers’ Pension
Fund. It was admitted that if this were done the appropriations for the
Fund would have to be increased. It was stated that, as there were some
Counties in the State which did not have such a Fund, the local Board
might be able to secure an increase in its appropriations from the State
funds not drawn upon by other Counties entitled thereto.

Mr. Brisbin told of the investigation then going on by members of the
Red Cross, and others, under his direction, in order to ascertain all
conditions surrounding each individual affected by the ravages of the
pandemic. He said that when the inquiries should be completed, in the
course of two or three weeks, there would be definite information as to
the exact number of orphans for whom permanent provision would have to
be made. He said that in many cases orphans would either be placed in
the care of relatives, or others, and that in the end the number to be
provided for by the public would not be as large as then anticipated.

It was then resolved, upon motion of Mr. Brown, that a committee,
representative of the entire County, should be appointed:

    “To devise plans for the permanent relief of all influenza
    orphans needing the same; and that prior to a meeting of this
    General Committee to be held on January 20, 1919, the Secretary
    should communicate with the various cities in Pennsylvania and
    other States, in which the epidemic had been serious, for the
    purpose of securing information regarding permanent relief plans
    adopted in those cities.”

In pursuance of this resolve it was decided that the following-named
persons should be invited to come together at the Chamber of Commerce on
January 20, 1919, at 3 o’clock p.m., for the purpose of effecting a
“permanent organization for the relief of influenza orphans in Luzerne
County.” William C. Shepherd, Percy A. Brown, C. F. Brisbin, William H.
Conyngham, John N. Conyngham, John D. Farnham, Hon. S. J. Strauss, Hon.
J. V. Kosek, Miss Anna Koons, Charles F. Huber, Miss Mary Brady, Miss
Rose O’Hara, Dr. Charles H. Miner, Dr. S. P. Mengel, Eugene W. Mulligan,
Anthony C. Campbell, Mrs. George Galland, Mrs. Francis A. Phelps, Mrs.
Andrew F. Derr, Miss Hobart, Miss Nellie Ritchie, Mrs. J. D. Davenport,
Victor Lee Dodson, Frederick J. Weckesser and Harold N. Rust of
Wilkes-Barré; Michael Lonski, F. H. Kohlbraker, Mrs. George G. Brader
and Mrs. Oliver Bell of Nanticoke; Fuller R. Hendershot, Dr. H. L.
Whitney, H. L. Freeman, Michael Maras and the Hon. Asa K. De Witt of
Plymouth; Mayor Henry W. Heidenreich and Harry A. Schmoll of Hazleton;
William Bray of Freeland; D. A. Mulherin of Glen Lyon; the Rev. M. A.
Dauber of Pike’s Creek; Robert Mulhall, William Joseph Peck, M. N.
Donnelly, Mayor James Kennedy, M. W. O’Boyle, W. L. Watson, W. J.
Kilgallen and Mrs. Joseph Peck of Pittston; Samuel M. Parke of West
Pittston; Mrs. E. E. Buckman, Mrs. Laurance M. Thompson and Harry W.
Ruggles of Dorranceton; the Rev. F. Kasaczun of Sugar Notch; V. B.
Sheeder and the Rev. Mr. Gillespie of Wanamie; the Rev. Selden L.
Haynes, the Rev. J. F. Jedlicka and Hubbard B. Payne of Kingston; the
Rev. J. E. Gryczka of Edwardsville; James L. Reilly, Secretary of the
Poor Board of the Central District of Luzerne County.

In response to notices sent out to the aforementioned persons, about
thirty-five of them assembled in the auditorium of the Wilkes-Barré
Chamber of Commerce in the afternoon of January 20, 1919. At the request
of Chairman Shepherd Mr. John N. Conyngham acted as Chairman _pro tem._
Mr. Shepherd then explained the purpose of the meeting, and the
necessity for providing some satisfactory method of taking care of the
children throughout the County who had been left in a destitute
condition by the influenza pandemic.

The Chairman _pro tem._ asked whether or not a permanent organization
should be formed. Mr. Mulhall thought that it would be wise to work
through some organization already in existence and possessing power to
enforce any law relating to the situation. He suggested the United
Charities as such an organization, and supplementary to this suggestion
Mr. Schmoll reported that in Hazleton forty-six influenza orphans were
at that time being taken care of by the United Charities of that City.

Mrs. Galland, President of the Mothers’ Pension Fund, thought it would
be the best plan to leave as many children as possible with their
surviving parents, and that practically all cases could be handled by
the Pension Fund—provided appropriations for it should be sufficiently
increased.

On motion of the Rev. Mr. Haynes it was finally voted that a temporary
organization be formed, to be known as the “Chamber of Commerce
Coöperation Committee”, to coöperate with existing agencies in making
investigations and providing relief for all deserving cases.

Mr. Brisbin, Chairman of the Civilian Relief Department of the Wyoming
Valley Chapter of the Red Cross, stated that his department had begun
investigations, regardless of any arrangements made, or to be made, by
other committees or organizations. It had been stated that the Women’s
Committee of the Council of National Defense was about to institute an
investigation of the orphan problem along the same lines being followed
by the Red Cross, and Mr. Brisbin called attention to the danger of
serious confusion and complications as a result of this overlapping
work.

Mrs. Phelps and Miss Brady (the latter an employé of the United
Charities of Wilkes-Barré) spoke of conditions found by them in many
homes where poverty reigned, and where it was necessary that something
should be done immediately to save these families from being ejected
from their homes by landlords because they could not pay their rents.
Thereupon Mr. Mulhall inquired why the Poor Boards could not pay the
rents of families in destitute circumstances. Mr. Dodson said that while
the Poor Board of the Central District was publicly not in favor of
paying rents, he believed it would take care of the rent question
quietly by paying money for that purpose to the United Charities. Mr.
Farnham stated that the Red Cross had some money which might be used for
that purpose.

Upon motion of Mr. Hendershot it was then voted that a committee be
appointed to work in conjunction with the State Department of Health in
an attempt to secure from the State Legislature financial relief for all
influenza orphans. As such committee the Chairman appointed Fuller R.
Hendershot, John D. Farnham and Percy A. Brown.

Upon motion of Mr. Haynes it was then voted to adjourn until January 22,
at which time efforts would be made to devise an immediate plan for the
permanent relief of influenza victims; and that the Secretary should
invite to this meeting representatives of the Red Cross, the United
Charities, and the Poor Boards in Luzerne and Carbon Counties.

The adjourned meeting of the Chamber of Commerce Coöperation Committee
held on January 22, 1919, was attended by about twenty persons. Mr.
William C. Shepherd presided, and L. K. Eldridge acted as Secretary. Mr.
Shepherd stated that it was the consensus of opinion that, so far as
possible, all orphans should be kept in their respective homes or be
taken care of by relatives or friends. Mr. Brisbin outlined the work
being done by the Civilian Relief Department of the Red Cross, stating
that cases were being investigated, and that in his judgment the County
had organizations enough to take care of the work, but that money was
greatly needed.

Thereupon Mr. Hendershot moved that a committee be appointed to confer
with the Poor Board, the Red Cross and other organizations with a view
to obtaining money for carrying on the relief work. This motion having
been carried the Chairman appointed the following committee, to be known
as the “Ways and Means Committee”: William H. Conyngham (Chairman), Dr.
Charles H. Miner, Anthony C. Campbell, Harold N. Rust and the Rev.
Selden L. Haynes.

Charles E. Keck, Esq., Solicitor for the Poor Board of the Central
District, then outlined the duties and limitations of that Board, and
stated that the members of the Board would be very glad to meet the
committee just appointed and go over with them the matter of providing
funds for needed relief. At this point Judge S. J. Strauss made some
very timely remarks to the effect that a committee should be appointed
to provide means for increasing the capacity and usefulness of the
Wilkes-Barré Home for Friendless Children. He stated that, in his
opinion, additional organizations were not necessary, but that the
Committee should co-operate with those already existing.

At a meeting of the Chamber of Commerce Coöperation Committee held on
January 31, 1919, Mr. Rust, reporting for the Ways and Means Committee,
stated that the latter had conferred with the attorney for the Poor
Board of the Central District, who informed the committee that in any
case where immediate relief was required the Board would investigate and
then administer such relief as was necessary.

Mr. Rust was of the opinion that, inasmuch as the taxpayers had provided
funds for the Poor Board, action should be taken by this Committee to
see that the Board properly took care of worthy cases. Further, that as
the law of the State prohibits the paying of rents by the Board, the
matter of rents should be taken care of by the Red Cross; that there
should be close coöperation between Wyoming Valley Chapter of the Red
Cross and the Poor Board of the Central District in the matter of
investigating cases; that immediate relief, when needed, should be
furnished, and that the disbursement of funds should be divided between
the Poor Board and the Red Cross. Mr. Farnham stated that in his opinion
the funds of the Red Cross would be available as far as they would go.

On motion of Mr. Rust it was then voted that the Civilian Relief
Department of Wyoming Valley Chapter of the Red Cross take to the Poor
Board of the Central District the fifty specific cases which they had
investigated; that these cases should be checked up against those
receiving relief from the Central Poor District, and if it should be
ascertained that there were any who were not receiving relief, the
District be requested to add such names to their list for immediate
investigation and relief; that the District pay for food, coal, etc.,
and that funds for the payment of rents be placed in the hands of the
Civilian Relief Department of the Red Cross.

On motion of Mrs. George Galland it was voted that the Coöperation
Committee of the Chamber of Commerce endorses the action of the
Commissioners of Luzerne County in agreeing to appropriate $25,000 to
the Mothers’ Pension Fund provided the State of Pennsylvania would
appropriate $1,000,000 to the general fund.

A meeting of the Coöperation Committee of the Chamber of Commerce was
held on February 19, 1919, with William C. Shepherd presiding and L. K.
Eldridge acting as Secretary. The minutes of the meeting held on January
31 were read and approved. Mr. Rust reported concerning the conference
held by the Ways and Means Committee with the Poor Board of the Central
District, stating that the latter had agreed to carry out, so far as
possible, the recommendations set forth in the resolution of the
Coöperation Committee adopted on January 31. The support promised by the
Poor Board would cover medical assistance, food, clothing, and nursing
when necessary; the Red Cross to pay rents.

Mrs. McLaughlin reported that the original fifty relief cases had been
turned over to the Poor Board, together with 202 additional cases. The
Poor Board had stated that 90% of these cases were already in their
hands, under investigation. It was also reported that several day
nurseries were under consideration, which would permit mothers to leave
their children there and take up employment. Mrs. Phelps stated that in
a number of cases widows had not yet received their insurance money;
that some of the societies in which insurance had been carried were said
to be bankrupt, while some of the larger insurance companies were
holding up the payment of amounts due on policies of deceased victims of
the epidemic.

On motion of Mr. Rust Mr. Brisbin was authorized to increase the
membership of the Civilian Relief Committee so as to meet the
requirements of the situation of affairs. It was voted, also, that he be
given full power to discuss and decide all matters with the Central Poor
Board, and that he consider the wisdom of employing persons to do social
service work during the ensuing three months.

On April 30, 1919, a quorum of the Chamber of Commerce Coöperation
Committee met in the Chamber of Commerce auditorium. Chairman Shepherd
stated that, inasmuch as the Red Cross and the Poor Board of the Central
District were taking care of matters for which the Coöperation Committee
had been constituted, it was his judgment that the Committee should be
discharged from further consideration of the matters in question. Mr.
Schmoll stated that in Hazleton all cases had been taken care of through
regular channels, and to the best of his knowledge there were no
destitute cases at that time. Mrs. Bell reported that in Nanticoke there
were twelve cases where rents were being paid, and would be paid as long
as necessary, by the Red Cross.

Mr. Conyngham stated that the work of the Red Cross, at that time, was
confined to the paying of rents. He could not say, however, how much
longer this work could be continued. It was suggested that, when the Red
Cross had reached the limits in its work of paying rents, the Poor Board
should take over the cases in Nanticoke. Mrs. McLaughlin stated that up
to that date 630 old cases and 75 new ones in the Central District had
been turned over to the Poor Board.

On motion of Mr. Conyngham it was voted to request the Poor Board to
employ as many experienced women as necessary to investigate and look
after cases after the Red Cross and other organizations had retired from
activity in the field. The Rev. Dr. Farr suggested that the Coöperation
Committee should receive from Mr. Brisbin a full and final report of the
important work done by the Civilian Relief Committee of Wyoming Valley
Chapter of the Red Cross, which work had been carried on under the
direction and management of Mr. Brisbin, and has been briefly referred
to hereinbefore.[7] There being no further business to be transacted,
the Committee adjourned _sine die_.

Footnote 7:

  A full report of the work performed by the Civilian Relief Committee
  will be found in the “History of Wyoming Valley Chapter of the
  American Red Cross,” soon to be published.

The “Committee for the Distribution of Funds for the Care and Relief of
Influenza Victims”, whose appointment is noted hereinbefore, held
various meetings for the transaction of business connected with the
duties confided to it. At a meeting held March 21, 1919, affairs
relative to the various Emergency Hospitals were thoroughly discussed,
following which Mr. Conyngham moved that all bills of the General
Committee be paid at once. This motion was carried. Mr. Hendershot then
moved that the Treasurer be instructed to pay the amounts of the various
Emergency Hospital bills which had been approved by the Committee. This
motion was carried.

At a subsequent meeting this Committee unanimously adopted the following
rules of procedure relative to the settlement of bills arising out of
the establishing of the seven Emergency Hospitals in Luzerne County:

    “(1) That the verified bills for the construction work of
    buildings, or altering or equipping temporary hospitals, should
    be paid.

    “(2) That the verified bills for the daily
    maintenance—consisting of food, drugs, medicines, and the
    overhead expense of light and fuel—together with such special
    expenses as were approved by the General Committee in relation
    to the general organization work throughout the County, be
    approved and paid.

    “(3) That bills in connection with the regularly established
    hospitals, and bills relating to the regular hospitals and
    charities, and the work of attendants in isolated homes, could
    not be approved and paid, as the moneys appropriated for this
    epidemic were appropriated for the specific purpose of the
    establishment and maintenance of hospitals for this work.”

At a meeting of the Distribution Committee held April 4, 1919, it was
resolved to issue to the public a “Letter of information concerning the
work of the Distribution Committee”. This letter was subsequently
prepared, giving a brief account of the organization of the committee
and the work it had accomplished, and, having been signed by the members
of the committee, was duly disseminated. The following paragraphs are
extracts from this letter:

    “The appropriation of funds by Luzerne County was made under an
    Act of the Pennsylvania Legislature approved May 14, 1915, and
    reading in part as follows:

    “‘_Section 1._ * * * The County Commissioners of any County may
    appropriate moneys for the support of any hospital, located
    within or without the limits of such County, which is engaged in
    charitable work and extends treatment and medical attention to
    residents of such County.

    “‘_Section 2._ All Acts and parts of Acts inconsistent with this
    Act are repealed.’

    “The appropriation of the City of Wilkes-Barré was made by the
    members of the City Council by a resolution reading as follows:

    “‘_Whereas_, the equipment and maintenance of the Emergency
    Hospital at the Armory is necessary to fight the influenza
    epidemic; and whereas much of the equipment can be later used at
    the Emergency Contagious Disease Hospital of the city of
    Wilkes-Barré which is now nearing completion,

    “_Therefore, Be it Resolved_, That the City of Wilkes-Barré
    appropriate $5,000., or so much thereof as may be necessary,
    toward the equipment and maintenance of the Armory or other
    Hospital; that the Citizens’ Committee in charge submit bills,
    properly audited, to the City of Wilkes-Barré, and the City pay
    such bills to an amount equal to the appropriation authorized;
    and that the equipment, which can later be used by the Emergency
    Contagious Hospital, become the property of the City; and that
    patients at the Armory Hospital, whose circumstances permit, be
    required to pay for such services, as is done at the other
    hospitals in the City.’”


                          Report of Treasurer

               DISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE INFLUENZA EPIDEMIC.

                                  ────

                               RECEIPTS.


                  From Luzerne County       $20,000.00

                  City of Wilkes-Barré        3,999.85

                  Wyoming Valley Chapter      3,963.36
                  Red Cross

                  The Bell Telephone             14.76
                  Company (Refund)

                  H. A. Whiteman & Co.           38.45
                  (Refund)

                                                  ────

                                            $28,016.42


                             EXPENDITURES.


                Paid to Nurses, Aids, etc., as follows:


                     Emily Jones            $ 40.00

                     Hilda Lewis              40.00

                     Nellie Loftus            40.00

                     Jennie May               40.00

                     Minnie Fry               40.00

                     Mrs. Harriet Hountz      54.00

                     Loretta Sullivan        102.00

                     Anna Walsh               80.00

                     Dorothy Guy              85.50

                     Nellie Fischer            7.33

                     Margaret Bechtold        84.00

                     Oliver Wolfe            108.00

                     Raymond Davis            51.00

                     Howard Roat              75.00

                     Robert Davenport         36.00

                     Mrs. Martha Edwards      48.63

                     Mrs. Myrtle Mooney       14.52

                     Mrs. Ellen Hosey         45.53

                     Bessie Evans              7.26

                     Hazle Smith               7.26

                     Lenore Williams          42.92

                     Evelyn Jones             15.97

                     Gwyn Winters             41.32

                     Goldie Womelsdorf        39.97

                     May Conlon               56.23

                     Nellie Sheridan          29.47

                     Katherine Dymond         32.52

                     Mrs. Hilda Hogg          45.87

                     Mary Sinko               23.61

                     Bessie Fadden            66.77

                     Esther Lynn              55.16

                     Laura Hughes             57.82

                     Annette Schofield        31.35

                     Susan Sable              43.16

                     Sister Angela            35.42

                     Ethel Jordon             31.35

                     Sarah Wilson              7.46

                     Arline Hale              10.50

                     Helen Wheatley           33.00

                     Katherine Longshore      40.81

                     Ruth Jones               47.52

                     Verda Vivian             39.46

                     Beth Porter              47.52

                     Margaret Larkin          47.52

                     Ada Bachstein            34.57

                     Dorothy Tennyson         39.46

                     Edna Bachstein           26.23

                     Eleanor Brown            26.23

                     Mrs. E. Silvara          40.00

                     Irene Lewis              40.00

                     Ruth Rae                 40.00

                     Lida Tucker              50.00

                     Margaret Burns           37.29

                     Rose Costello            47.33

                     May Williams             62.00

                     Clara Campbell           20.00

                     Emily Sprake              5.50

                     Mrs. P. Hanson           89.83

                     Jessie Cunningham        14.00

                     Leslie Covert            42.00

                     George Berry             57.00

                     Ernest Wright             6.00

                     Mrs. Margaret Jacobs     19.02

                     Elizabeth Williams       15.97

                     Anna McNulty             81.29

                     Florence Desh            11.61

                     Mrs. Lena Krum            7.26

                     Margaret Griesmer        44.23

                     Ellen McGuigan           54.73

                     Olwen Williams           41.32

                     Kathleen Bishop          10.16

                     Mrs. Jean Langford       29.42

                     Gertrude Lenahan         20.32

                     Mildred Perry            50.32

                     Madge Heffron            47.56

                     Mary Roache               2.90

                     Alice Fuller             43.06

                     Mrs. James Lockett       11.61

                     Leyl VanHoesen             .46

                     Mrs. F. T. Mitchell      31.16

                     Anna Boyle                7.40

                     Sister Pierre            41.23

                     Anna McMenanin           23.96

                     Olive Carle               4.35

                     Jeanette Washington       7.50

                     Alice McCarty            18.00

                     Irene McGinty            10.50

                     Margaret Andes           40.81

                     Ellen Davis              47.52

                     Mary Humphrey            47.52

                     Margaret Porter          47.52

                     Agnes Riley              39.46

                     Mable Davis              24.19

                     Katherine Gaffikin       47.52

                     Mildred Weathers         47.48

                     Anna Tobias              50.00

                     Maria Blazick            54.84

                     Irma Goodale             56.39

                     Catherine Thomas         59.68

                     Ann Shanghnessy          13.33

                     Mrs. G. L. Todd          46.51

                     Anna Yanalovitch         85.48

                     Mary Koseck              82.26

                     Millie Heslop            88.71

                     Eleanor Martin           66.13

                     Mrs. Ann Davies          15.00

                     Helen Yablonski          29.09

                     Anna Eaton               67.20

                     Edith Franklin           56.46

                     Mary Mieczkoski          69.93

                     Margaret Burke           47.96

                     Freda Turner             19.52

                     Hannah Davis             17.96

                     Ethel Jones              47.52

                     Emma Cleason             33.87

                     Carolina Bryant          22.58

                     Leah Craig               33.87

                     Marguerite Davey         33.87

                     Bertha Griffith          33.87

                     Mrs. Kathleen Brew       20.40

                     Nell Jordan              19.84

                     Beatrice Sorber          28.93

                     Nellie Blackburn         33.87

                     Helen Finley             33.87

                     Barbara Swanberry        22.58

                     Elizabeth Beeunas        11.29

                     Margaret McDonald        17.74

                     Jennie Jesuit            16.67

                     Frances Keller           16.67

                     Mrs. J. Bavrick          46.51

                     Mrs. E. Massman          26.19

                     Mrs. Blanche Evans       41.94

                     Mrs. Clara Swishere       0.81

                     Emma Wagner              12.50

                     Rachael King             11.67

                     Mrs. Ellen Dailey        28.88

                     Mrs. Ruth Tyrell         25.38

                     Mrs. Elizabeth           31.07
                     Deitrick

                     Kathryn Kransky          23.77

                     Mrs. Minnie Williams     22.15

                     Elena Heineman           28.73

                     Gertrude McCarthy        39.52

                     Nan Wintersteen          25.35

                     Mrs. Kate Heston          1.61

                     Mrs. E. Roszykiewicz      9.98

                     Anna Owen                 6.67

                     Mrs. Marie Caffrey       13.20

                     Jennie Audi              16.48

                     Nora Aubrey              16.45

                     Mrs. Mollie Dennison     18.29

                     Kathleen Lavelle         59.68

                     Helen Slacinski          60.27

                     Josephine Reokey         34.09

                     Margaret Meekin          95.16

                     Anna Groschke            50.59

                     Sarah Kelley             25.81

                     Mary Clemmons            21.66

                     Marie Strome             27.52

                     Iona Brelsford           16.13

                     Doris Reedy              75.81

                     Mrs. A. Dowling          31.62

                     Mayette Mulligan         52.85

                     Helen Mais               23.12

                     Marjorie Lindsay         49.25

                     Alice Kochinsky          12.90

                     Sophia Roach             68.87

                     Edna Runyan              45.54

                     Jennie Moore             11.29

                     Elizabeth Morris         22.58

                     Ruth Thomas              22.58

                     Annette Kivler             .81

                     Laura Kokensperger       23.06

                     Violet Clark              5.65

                     Mrs. Mary McClusky        4.94

                     Martha Howard            22.53

                     Blanche Wilkes           33.87

                     Mary Levix               11.29

                     Mary Biczcak             22.58

                     Sophia Chukinski         23.33

                     Helen Gajewski           16.67

                     Myrtle Socha             41.67

                     Sarah Taff               49.57

                     Mrs. Hannah Jones        22.02

                     Mrs. Delia Dunn          11.67

                     Mrs. Maria Jones         24.17

                     Mrs. Margaret Jones      10.83

                     Mrs. Margaret            11.67
                     Meehans

                     Mrs. A. Steinhauer       43.55

                     Mrs. C. Devaney           3.23

                     Mrs. C. Davies            4.03

                     Mrs. Minnie Llewelyn     22.96

                     Mrs. Marie Shaffer        8.26

                     Gertrude Cooper          22.96

                     Mrs. Anna Norris         27.04

                     Mrs. Minnie Reich        20.56

                     Mrs. Esther Hogg         14.94

                     Mrs. B. Mulhern          28.23

                     Mrs. Charles Burk         3.33

                     Mrs. Belle Connor         5.83

                     Mrs. M. Farber           13.15

                                               ────

                                          $6,746.34


               PAID TO EMERGENCY HOSPITALS THROUGHOUT THE
                           COUNTY AS FOLLOWS.


            Dupont Borough Emergency Hospital      $ 428.69

            Jacob Neuman (Dupont)                    200.00

            Exeter Borough Emergency Hospital      1,121.33

            Hazleton City Emergency Hospital         898.72

            Hazleton City Emergency Hospital         928.63

            Nanticoke Borough Emergency Hospital   1,009.82

            Newport Township Emergency Hospital    1,320.44
            (Wanamie)

            Plains Township Emergency Hospital       467.32

                                                       ────

                                                          $
                                                   6,374.95


PAID MISCELLANEOUS BILLS AS LISTED, FOR WHICH REIMBURSEMENT HAS BEEN
    MADE BY THE CITY OF WILKES-BARRE, RECEIPTED BILLS HAVING BEEN
    DELIVERED TO THE CITY TREASURER.

           Anthracite Bedding Mfg. Co.     $ 31.25

           "         "      "   "           112.50

           "         "      "   "            12.50

                                              ────  $ 156.25

           Mrs. Alice Adams                            14.00

           Aston’s Pharmacy                             4.00

           Frank Baab                                 602.99

           Frank E. Baldwin                           127.77

           "   "    "                         5.33

           "   "    "                         3.28

                                              ────      8.61

           Bell Telephone Co.              $ 25.50

           "      "      "                   25.65

           "      "      "                   20.00

           "      "      "                    5.92

                                              ────     77.07

           Bell Telephone Co.               $ 2.14

           "      "      "                    5.50

           "      "      "                    2.81

                                              ────     10.45

           Boston Store                    $ 78.93

           "      "                          11.90

           "      "                         224.66

                                              ────    315.49

           W. D. Beers, Inc.                           23.50

             Col. Eyer paid bills as
           follows:

           Ruth Wildrick                    $ 3.00

           "     "                            2.00

           Mrs. L. Davis                      4.00

           "   "   "                          2.00

           Mrs. A. Adams                      3.00

           Miss Williams                      1.00

           Harry Adams                        3.00

           Lill Eckert                        1.00

           Chester Adams                      2.00

           Mrs. Phillips                      2.00

           Mrs. Mary Meehan                   2.00

           E. Dunning                         2.00

           A. Ricaloski                       2.00

           Mrs. R. Kisbon                     2.00

           Mrs. C. Walsh                      2.00

           Mary Rasmas                        4.00

           Mrs. L. Williams                   3.00

           Mrs. M. Reed                       4.00

           Mrs. Ira Fox                       1.00

           E. Eckert                          8.00

           Eleanor Williams                   1.00

           James Glasser                      4.00

           Aaron Lane                         4.00

           Joe Riggs                          4.00

           Frank Baab                          .60

           Wilkes-Barré Cleaning Co.         18.00

           Lewis & Bennett                   24.20

                                              ────    108.80

           Frey Brothers                                2.10

           Frank & Barber                              85.05

           G. L. C. Frantz                  $ 5.75

           "       "                          3.88

           "       "                         15.40

           "       "                         27.83

                                              ────     52.86

           Gray & Company                               2.00

           Green’s Pharmacy                           103.39

           John H. Green                              125.04

           W. H. Green Pharmacy                         1.72

           A. Kline                          27.26

           "       "                          7.28

                                              ────     34.54

           Isaac Long                                  30.47

           Lewis & Bennett Hardware Co.     $ 7.10

           "       "       "       "          2.75

           "       "       "       "          3.90

           "       "       "       "          2.45

           "       "       "       "           .65

           "       "       "       "          2.75

           "       "       "       "         22.75

           "       "       "       "          6.40

           "       "       "       "          2.25

           "       "       "       "         31.50

           "       "       "       "          7.80

           "       "       "       "         14.00

           "       "       "       "          6.30

           "       "       "       "          5.65

           "       "       "       "           .20

           "       "       "       "          1.80

           "       "       "       "          3.62

           "       "       "       "          5.26

           "       "       "       "          1.20

           "       "       "       "          8.17

           "       "       "       "          3.25

           "       "       "       "          1.54

           "       "       "       "          1.25

           "       "       "       "           .40

           "       "       "       "          3.15

           "       "       "       "          4.68

                                              ────    150.77

           Murray-Smith Company                        14.70

           MacWilliams                       36.47

           "                                   .80

                                              ────     37.27

           C. Morgan’s Sons                             7.75

           H. H. Roth                      $ 64.20

                                               .25

           "   "                              1.80

                                              ────     66.25

           Susquehanna Motor Car Co.        $ 1.45

           "       "     "  "                 1.80

           "       "     "  "                 3.11

           "       "     "  "                 6.60

           "       "     "  "                 1.70

           "       "     "  "                 2.82

           "       "     "  "                 1.99

           "       "     "  "                 3.11

                                              ────     22.58

           C. D. Steinhauer                            38.00

           "      "                                     4.85

           Shepherd Construction Company              719.33

           Joseph Schuler                    39.85

           "     "                           62.09

                                              ────    101.94

                   Lieut. Trein paid
           bills as follows:

           John Madden                      $  .20

           M. V. Black                       10.00

           W. Zeigler                          .35

           Kline’s China Palace                .75

           Ruth Wildrick                       .75

           Lillian Davis                       .75

           Charles Rutherford                 3.50

           William Doyle                     10.50

           W. B. Goeringer                    7.00

           George White                       7.00

           M. J. Stout                       20.00

           E. L. Klipple                       .30

           C. W. Rutherford                    .50

           Motor Car Supply                    .75

           White Hardware Company              .66

           Irene Lewis                       10.00

                                              ────     72.86

           Mrs. Ash                         $ 3.00

           Mrs. Eckert                         .90

           W. R. Toomb                        1.00

           W. A. Phillips                     1.55

           Mary Black                          .30

           Ball Quick Repair Shop             1.75

                                              ────      8.50

           F. W. Woolworth Company          $ 1.45

           Ball Quick Repair Shop             1.50

           W. R. Toomb                        2.59

           C. J. Deibel                      13.73

           Mrs. Black                          .36

           Mrs. V. Black                     10.00

                                              ────     29.63

           Wilkes-Barré Record                 .75

           Fowler, Dick & Walker              1.68

           F. W. Woolworth Co.                4.45

           J. C. Madden                        .30

           Riker-Hegeman                      7.76

           William Doyle                     24.50

           Wayne Canfield                     5.76

           Serg. Bradbury                     5.50

           Charles Rutherford                10.00

           W. R. Toomb                         .10

           Posten Bros.                       7.75

           Mrs. Williamson                    2.00

           Wilkes-Barré Laundry Co.           3.18

           F. W. Woolworth Co.                6.40

           "      "       "                   3.95

                                              ────     84.08

           Cash paid for meals by Lieut.      2.60
           Trein

           "    "         "        "          1.70
           "

           "    "         "        "           .30
           "

           "    "         "        "          5.25
           "

           "    "         "        "          7.00
           "

           "    "         "        "          3.85
           "

           "    "         "        "          3.15
           "

                                              ────     23.85

           Wilkes-Barré Company             152.47

           "         "                       76.24

           "         "                       57.56

           "         "                       69.69

                                              ────    355.96

           Wilkes-Barré Company               4.90

           "            "                    31.75

           "            "                     7.40

           "            "                    10.00

                                              ────     54.05

           H. A. Whiteman                     3.75

           "       "                         10.50

           "       "                         15.20

           "       "                          9.00

                                              ────     38.45

           H. A. Whiteman & Co.              11.20

           "      "        "                  6.50

           "      "        "                  3.75

           "      "        "                  4.00

           "      "        "                  5.45

           "      "        "                 11.20

           "      "        "                  3.75

           "      "        "                  3.75

           "      "        "                  5.40

           "      "        "                 38.45

                                              ────     93.45

           Wyoming Valley Undermuslin Co.             100.00

           White & Co.                                 80.88

           Zorzi Brothers                               8.50

                                                        ────

                                                   $3,999.85


THE FOLLOWING BILLS PAID FOR WHICH REIMBURSEMENT HAS BEEN MADE BY THE
    WYOMING VALLEY CHAPTER RED CROSS.

           American Red Cross, Wyoming     $ 459.06
           Valley Chapter

           "      "    "       "      "       36.00
               "

                                               ────  $ 495.06

           American Red Cross, Wyoming                 557.60
           Valley Chapter

           Percy A. Brown & Co.               30.29

           "  "    "    "                     10.20

                                               ────     40.49

           J. J. Becker Co.                              2.40

           W. D. Beers                       268.01

           "    "                              3.80

           "    "                            102.95

                                               ────    375.66

           Percy A. Brown & Co.                        330.65

           Mrs. E. B. Carr                             199.00

           City Auto Co.                                 3.85

           Davis Brothers                                1.50

           Farmers’ Dairy                              179.58

           Green’s Pharmacy                             16.70

           Kline’s China Palace                          7.48

           W. A. King & Co.                              2.95

           Leonard Grocery Co.                           2.66

           Charles Maurer                                7.44

           Mulherin Brothers                             1.27

           Frank F. Matheson Co.                       852.47

           Poland’s Hotel                                5.62

           Susquehanna Motor Car Co.           5.65

           "       "     "  "                  4.27

           "       "     "  "                  1.00

           "       "     "  "                 83.45

           "       "     "  "                  1.45

           "       "     "  "                 10.96

           "       "     "  "                 10.55

           "       "     "  "                 22.86

           "       "     "  "                  3.69

           "       "     "  "                  8.25

           "       "     "  "                  4.13

           "       "     "  "                  9.00

                                               ────    165.26

           Spring Lake Ice Co.                           1.98

           Smith & Clark                                 8.53

           Lieut. Trein                                  8.05

           Tremayne’s                                    3.00

           Visiting Nurse Association                  315.00

           Western Union                                  .25

           Williams Bros. & Co.                         35.63

           H. A. Whiteman & Co.                         18.25

           Red Cross Canteen Fund                      157.38

           Red Cross, for bills handed us
           for

            payment, said bills having
           previously

            been paid by the Red Cross        84.08

           Red Cross, for bills handed us
           for

            payment, said bills having
           previously

            been paid by the Red Cross        83.58

                                               ────    167.66

                                                         ────

                                                     3,963.37


PAID THE FOLLOWING BILLS COVERING PURCHASE OF MEDICINES, FOOD, ETC.,
    EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF ARMORY EMERGENCY HOSPITAL, GENERAL
    ADMINISTRATION, ETC.

           Alheim’s Meat Market                        $ 2.49

           Acme Sales Co.                                6.08

           Mrs. Alice Adams                             30.00

           Mrs. Adams                                   14.00

           Armour & Co.                       80.13

           "       "                           9.00

                                               ────     89.13

           Acheson Bread Co.                   9.76

           "     "     "                       4.32

                                               ────     14.08

           Atlantic Refining Co.               1.50

           "      "        "                   2.38

           "      "        "                   1.75

                                               ────      5.63

           Frank Baab                                    2.50

           George T. Bell & Co.                         12.35

           Bell Telephone Co.                 10.07

           "    "         "                    7.14

           "    "         "                   15.00

                                               ────     32.21

           Boston Store                         .79

           "      "                           12.50

                                               ────     13.29

           Bratzvo (circulars)                         300.00

           William Brodhun                    48.00

           "       "                          24.00

                                               ────     72.00

           Percy A. Brown & Co.              599.25

           "   "    "                        272.17

           "   "    "                         16.99

                                               ────    888.41

           J. B. Carr Biscuit Co.              6.78

           "  "    "      "                    3.80

                                               ────     10.58

           City Auto Co.                                49.13

           Mrs. Kate Closki                             25.00

           Davis Bros.                                   1.60

           Deemer & Co.                        4.18

           "      "                             .40

           "      "                             .95

           "      "                           11.17

                                               ────     16.70

           Durkin Bros.                                  2.00

           Mrs. E. Eckert                               30.00

           L. K. Eldridge, for
           addressing,

            postage, delivery, etc., of

            history and financial report

            of epidemic                                146.00

           Mrs. Emma Eckert                   14.00

           "    "    "                        14.00

                                               ────     28.00

           L. K. Eldridge                      2.90

           "     "                            85.10

           "     "                           100.00

                                               ────    188.00

           Evening News                                 32.40

           F. A. Flock                                    .60

           Frank & Barber                      3.00

           "      "                           29.20

                                               ────     32.20

           G. L. C. Frantz                               4.23

           Frey Bros.                                    2.10

           Wilbur Goeringer                              6.34

           W. V. Green                                   4.20

           Oscar Harvey (Historian)                    100.00

           John Kashenbach                             150.00

           W. A. King & Co.                              2.60

           Francis Klein                      70.00

           "      "                           55.00

                                               ────    125.00

           Herman Knappman                              43.45

           L. P. Kniffen                               235.00

           S. S. Kresge & Co.                             .90

           Mrs. W. A. Lathrop                           41.00

           Lazarus Bros.                                14.50

           Lehigh Valley Coal Co.            150.00

           "      "     "    "                92.00

                                               ────    242.00

           Levy Bros.                                    9.80

           Lewis & Bennett Co.                           2.21

           Lincoln Garage                               21.40

           J. C. Lingo                                  17.00

           B. E. Loomis                                 12.60

           MacWilliams                                    .45

           Frank F. Matheson Co.                       918.05

           Mercy Hospital                              500.00

           Montayne                                     25.00

           C. F. Murray-Smith Co.                       16.00

           J. E. Patterson                              46.35

           Plain Speaker, Hazleton                       8.25

           William Puckey & Bro.                         1.20

           The Raeder Printing Co.                       6.00

           George Rizzo                                  2.00

           Joseph Rizzo                                  3.00

           Charles Rutherford, orderly                  28.50

           W. J. Schoonover Glass Co.                    2.75

           Shepherd Construction Co.                     3.75

           Susquehanna Motor Car Co.                    45.23

           Shepherd-Rust Company                         8.10

           Ernest Smith                       25.00

           "     "                            15.00

                                               ────     40.00

           Smith & Sansom Ice Cream Co.        2.90

           "       "      "   "   "            2.90

                                               ────      5.80

           Spring Lake Ice Co.                 6.05

           "     "    "    "                   7.13

           "     "    "    "                  15.00

                                               ────     28.18

           Standard Sentinel, Hazleton                   8.25

           Michael J. Stout, orderly          70.00

           "     "    "    "                  30.00

                                               ────    100.00

           Susquehanna Motor Car Co.          67.54

           "       "    "   "                101.13

           "       "    "   "                 89.44

           "       "    "   "                  5.50

           "       "    "   "                  1.30

           "       "    "   "                  1.36

           "       "    "   "                   .80

           "       "    "   "                 12.68

                                               ────    279.75

           The Times-Leader                             46.80

           W. R. Toomb & Co.                            24.09

           Lieut. Trein                        5.15

           "     "                            40.45

           "     "                             1.75

           "     "                            11.55

           "     "                            12.03

                                               ────     92.03

           H. C. Tuck & Co.                              7.00

           A. P. Ward & Co.                              3.50

           G. L. Weitzel & Son                           1.50

           Western Union                      25.53

           "     "                              .25

                                               ────     25.78

           George White, orderly              38.50

           "     "       "                    49.00

                                               ────     87.50

           John Williamson & Co.                         5.30

           Mrs. J. P. Williamson (petty                 40.00
           cash)

           Wilkes-Barré Chamber of                      13.64
           Commerce, postage

           "         "          "                        1.30
           "

           Wilkes-Barré Laundry Co.                     28.20

           Wilkes-Barré Record                32.00

           "         "                        12.50

                                               ────     44.50

           F. W. Woolworth Co.                 1.80

           "      "      "                    10.00

                                               ────     11.80

           E. B. Yordy Co.                   335.00

           "      "      "                    19.00

                                               ────    354.00

           E. B. Yordy Co.                              50.75

           Zorzi Bros.                                  13.50

                                                         ────

                                                            $
                                                     6,010.01

           Balance returned to Treasurer,              921.90
           Luzerne County

                                                         ────

                                                    $28,016.42


Receipted bills and/or cancelled vouchers handed to the Controller of
Luzerne County.

                                                            WM. J. RUFF,
                                                              Treasurer.

Wilkes-Barré, Pa., December 29, 1919.


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                Roster.

                                  ────

of State Nurses, Graduate Nurses, Practical Nurses, Volunteer Pupil
Nurses, Sisters of Mercy, Volunteer Aids, Red Cross Canteen Workers,
Members of the Visiting Nurses’ Association, and others, who rendered
important services in the various Emergency Hospitals in Luzerne
County.[8]

Footnote 8:

  According to a report made to the State Department of Health by Dr.
  Charles H. Miner in February, 1919, “the Committee of Hygiene and
  Nursing of Wyoming Valley Chapter of the American Red Cross was very
  active in securing volunteer nurses, so that we had during the
  epidemic seventy Graduate Nurses (including seven State Nurses),
  fourteen Visiting Nurses of the Visiting Nurses’ Association,
  forty-four Practical Nurses and eighty nurses’ aids, working under the
  very efficient direction of Miss Nellie G. Loftus, the nurse in charge
  of District No. 5.”


    Augustine, Sister Mary
    Ambrose, Sister Mary
    Agnita, Sister Mary
    Ayers, James
    Annunciata, Sister
    Avellino, Sister Mary
    Angela, Sister Mary
    Agatha, Sister
    Aubrey, Nora
    Andreas, Margaret
    Allen, Mrs. Jack
    Ayers, Mrs. M. M.
    Audi, Jennie
    Alice, Sister Mary
    Adrian, Sister Mary
    Anselm, Sister Mary
    Adams, Mrs. Alice
    Austin, Elizabeth
    Austin, Ruth
    Ash, Mrs. Harry
    Bonaventure, Sister Mary
    Burke, Bridget
    Beyer, Julia
    Brady, Josephine
    Berry, George
    Brannigan, Edgar
    Berchman, Sister
    Burke, Margaret
    Bachstein, Ada
    Blasick, Marie
    Bedford, Mrs. Paul
    Brown, Eleanor J.
    Brelsford, Iona
    Burke, Mrs. Charles
    Bell, Mabel
    Brew, Mrs. Kathleen
    Bleschok, Mary
    Blackburn, Nellie
    Beeunas, Elizabeth
    Bryant, Carolina
    Bishop, Kathleen
    Bechtold, Margaret
    Bachstein, Edna
    Boyle, Anna E.
    Burns, Margaret
    Boscoe, Miss
    Brown, Miss
    Beck, Mrs. Harry M.
    Black, Miss Mae
    Beaumont, Mrs. A. A.
    Brown, Florence
    Barker, Mrs. F. M.
    Barlow, Frances
    Butler, Julia
    Barger, Frances
    Bunting, Mrs. Douglass
    Brundage, Mae
    Casimir, Sister Mary
    Carmel, Sister Mary
    Curry, Isabelle
    Corcoran, Mollie
    Curry, Mrs. Sara
    Conlon, Mrs. P. J.
    Concepta, Sister Mary
    Crescentia, Sister Mary
    Covert, Leslie H.
    Cajetine, Sister
    Clemmons, Mary
    Conlon, May
    Celestine, Sister
    Clark, Mrs. Violet
    Clark, Elsie
    Caley, Margaret
    Chirkirski, Sophie
    Cobleigh, Violet
    Collett, Joyce
    Cavanaugh, Mary
    Cram, Ruth
    Carver, Mrs. Sarah
    Caffrey, Mrs. Marie
    Connor, Mrs. Belle
    Cooper, Gertrude
    Craig, Leah
    Carle, Olive
    Cunningham, Jessie
    Campbell, Clara
    Costello, Rose S.
    Camillus, Sister Mary
    Carr, Mrs. E. Birney
    Casselberry, Mrs. H.
    Carr, Helen V.
    Collins, Mrs. P. J.
    Chase, Frances
    Drexinger, Frank X.
    Davis, Raymond
    Davenport, Robert
    Dymond, Mrs.
    Davies, Mrs. Gertrude
    Dunn, Mrs. Delia
    Douglass, Mrs. Francis
    Davis, Helen C.
    Davis, Bess
    Doud, Mrs. Jos. C.
    Doud, Marjorie
    Darte, Mrs. Franck
    Derr, Mrs. A. F.
    Darling, Mrs. Thomas
    De la Salle, Sister Mary
    Davis, Mrs. Anna
    Donohoe, Agnes
    Dean, Catherine
    DeLourdes, Sister Mary
    Davitt, Michael
    Dowling, Mrs. Alice
    Dooley, Agnes
    Davis, Hannah
    Dolorosa, Sister
    Davis, Ellen
    Davis, Mabel
    Dennison, Mrs. Mollie
    Dietrick, Elizabeth
    Dailey, Mrs. Ellen
    Devaney, Mrs. C.
    Davies, Mrs. C.
    Davey, Beatrice
    Davey, Margaret
    Desh, Florence
    Dymond, Katharine
    DeLellis, Sister Mary
    Dolores, Sister Mary
    Eulalia, Sister Mary
    Edmund, Sister Mary
    Eugene, Sister
    Evans, Mrs. Blanche
    Eckhart, Mrs. Benjamin
    Ernestine, Sister Mary
    Edwards, Mrs. Lottie
    Eaton, Anna
    Edwards, Mrs. Martha
    Evans, Bessie
    Eileen, Sister Mary
    Evans, Mrs. D. A.
    Eckert, Mrs. Emma
    Elliott, Mrs. Stephen
    Evans, Mrs. Abbie
    Felicita, Sister Mary
    Ferguson, John
    Fadden, Bessie
    Flynn, Michael
    Franklin, Edith
    Farber, Mrs. Mary
    Fischer, Viola
    Finley, Helen
    Faulls, Marian
    Fuller, Alice
    Fry, Minnie
    Fisher, Casper R.
    Farrell, Helen
    Frantz, Mrs. H. G.
    Frantz, Eleanor M.
    Foley, Mrs. Rose
    Frantz, Jet M.
    Frantz, Georgia E.
    Frantz, Jean
    Frey, Kate
    Ferenbach, Mrs. Carl
    Griesmer, Margaret
    Gilboy, Mary
    Gildea, M.
    Germaine, Sister Mary
    Gonzaga, Sister Mary
    Genevieve, Sister Mary
    Garrahan, Michael
    Gildea, Sarah
    Griffith, Elsie
    Gaffikin, Catherine
    Gajewski, Helen
    Groschke, Anna
    Goodall, Irma
    Gleason, Emma
    Griffith, Bertha
    Guy, Dorothy
    Healy, Margery
    Helfrick, Bertha
    Halpin, Theresa
    Hale, Arline
    Havrick, Mrs. J.
    Humphrey, Mary
    Hayden, Anna
    Haslam, Mrs. Elizabeth
    Harvey, Carol L.
    Heslop, Minnie
    Heston, Mrs. Kate
    Hoog, Mrs. Esther
    Hineman, Mrs. Ellena
    Howard, Martha
    Hayden, Mrs. P. J.
    Hosey, Mrs. Ellen
    Hughes, Laura
    Hogg, Mrs. Hilda
    Hanson, Mrs. P. J.
    Houtz, Mrs. Harriet
    Huberta, Sister Mary
    Heffron, Madge
    Horn, Serg’t John A.
    Harter, Fred. C.
    Huber, Mrs. C. F.
    Hillman, Mrs. Arthur
    Higgins, Mrs. P. J.
    Hughes, Mrs. W. E.
    Haman, Mrs. M. L.
    Horn, Margaret
    Higgins, Eileen
    Higgins, Anna
    Hand, Kathleen
    Hodge, Louise
    Herman, Miss
    Imelda, Sister Mary
    Ireland, Mrs. Maud
    Immaculata, Sister Mary
    Julia, Sister Mary
    James, Sister Mary
    Jones, Mrs. Hannah
    Jerome, Sister Mary
    Judge, Mrs. James J.
    Jordan, Nell
    Jesuit, Jennie
    Jones, Ethel
    Jordan, Ethel
    Jones, Ruth
    Joslin, Mrs.
    Jones, Erminie
    Jones, Mrs. Margaret
    Jones, Mrs. Maria
    Jones, Evelyn
    Jacobs, Mrs. Margaret
    Justine, Sister Mary
    Jones, Emily G.
    John, Sister Mary
    Jacobs, Robert S.
    Jeffries, Mrs.
    Johnson, Mrs. W. C.
    Jayne, Abbie
    Jones, Mrs. Harold
    Jenkins, Mrs. J. E.
    Kelly, Anne
    Koblonske, Helen
    Keller, Frances
    Kachinski, Alice
    Kelly, Sarah
    Koseck, Mary
    Kelly, Mary
    King, Rachael T.
    Kokensperger, Laura
    Kivler, Annette
    Kransky, Kathryn
    Krum, Mrs. Lena
    Kent, Mrs. E. H.
    Kraft, Louis J.
    Kropp, Mrs. G. W.
    Linahan, Margaret
    Lynn, Esther
    Linehan, Gertrude
    Larkin, Margaret
    Lindsay, Marjorie
    Lavelle, Kathryn
    Longshore, Katharine
    Lee, Abbie
    List, Dorothy
    Llewellyn, Mrs. Minnie
    Levix, Mary
    Langford, Mrs. Jean
    Landers, Nellie Fisher
    Lewis, Irene
    Loftus, Nellie G.
    Lockett, Mrs. James
    Lewis, E. Hilda
    Liguori, Sister Mary
    Leger, Louis
    Loveland, Bessie
    LaFrance, Mrs. E.
    Lydon, Helen B.
    Lawall, Mrs. Elmer H.
    Lenahan, Kathleen
    Long, Mrs. Charles
    Lathrop, Mrs. W. A.
    Lee, Alice
    McAniff, Mary R.
    McCormack, Thomas
    McCormack, Mary
    McGinty, Irene
    McDonald, Margaret
    McClusky, Mrs. M.
    McCarthy, Gertrude
    McGuigan, Ellen
    McNulty, Anna
    McCarthy, Alice
    McMenamin, Anna
    Mildred, Sister
    Michael, Sister Mary
    Massman, Mrs. Eva
    Merrick, Catherine
    Martin, Eleanor
    Morris, Elizabeth
    Moore, Jennie
    Mulligan, Mayette
    Mieczloski, Mary
    Mace, Helen
    Meekin, Margaret
    Martin, Mary
    Meehans, Mrs. Margaret
    Mulhern, Mrs. B.
    Mooney, Mrs. Myrtle
    Mitchell, Mrs. F. T.
    May, Jennie
    Matthew, Sister Mary
    Mandeville, Mrs. C.
    Mason, Mrs. Harry C.
    Miner, Mrs. Charles H.
    Mercur, Elizabeth
    Norris, Anna E.
    Normand, Mrs. J. B.
    Noot, Mrs. James
    Norris, Esther
    Norris, Jane
    Nicholson, Edith
    O’Connell, Elizabeth
    Owens, Anna
    O’Donnell, W. J.
    Pissott, Esther
    Paul, Mother Mary
    Porter, Margaret
    Perry, Mildred
    Patricia, Sister Mary
    Perham, Mrs. T. R.
    Porter, Beth
    Pierre, Sister Mary
    Price, Walter E.
    Pier, Mrs.
    Phelps, Margaret D.
    Pease, Helen
    Phillips, Mildred
    Poland, Mae
    Pettebone, Mrs. Stephen
    Phelps, Mrs. J. A.
    Raphael, Sister Mary
    Ruth, Sister Mary
    Roderick, Mrs. Richard
    Rose, Sister Mary
    Runyan, Edna
    Ross, Isabelle
    Richards, Arline
    Roach, Sophia
    Reese, Mable
    Reokey, Josephine
    Reilly, Agnes
    Reedy, Doris
    Rea, Thomas
    Reich, Mrs. Minnie
    Roszykiewicz, Mrs. E.
    Roat, Howard E.
    Rae, Ruth B.
    Ruth, Sister Mary
    Roache, Mary
    Reilly, Margaret
    Rutter, Mrs. James M.
    Regan, Ruth
    Rush, Elizabeth
    Reynolds, Mrs. Dorrance
    Reynolds, Mrs. Peirce
    Ricketts, Mrs. Wm. B.
    Reynolds, Edith
    Searfoss, Mrs. Wm.
    Selicital, Sister
    Sebastian, Sister Mary
    Steinhauer, Mrs. A.
    Swanberry, Barbara
    Sheposki, Anthony
    Socak, Myrtle
    Shaughnessy, Anna
    Sprake, Emily
    Slacinski, Helen
    Strome, Marie L.
    Sorber, Beatrice
    Sheffer, Mrs. Marie
    Sheridan, Nellie
    Smith, Hazel P.
    Sable, Susan
    Schofield, Antoinette
    Silvara, Mrs. E.
    Sullivan, Loretta
    Sinko, Mary
    Silverstein, Serg’t Jacob
    Swisher, Mrs.
    Stevens, Mrs. C. J.
    Strauss, Bertha
    Sturdevant, Jessie
    Strauss, Mrs. S. J.
    Shoemaker, Jane
    Todd, Mrs. G. L.
    Turner, Freda
    Thomas, Catherine
    Tobias, Anna
    Taff, Sarah
    Tennyson, Dorothy
    Theis, Mrs. Maud
    Thomas, Anna
    Trescott, Mary L.
    Tyrrell, Mrs. Ruth
    Thomas, Ruth
    Tucker, Lida H.
    Theophane, Sister Mary
    Thomas, Thomas T.
    Trainor, Marcus T.
    Turrell, Mrs. H. W.
    Treglawn, Clara H.
    Thomas, Frances H.
    Tischler, Mrs. Joseph
    Thompson, Mrs. Eliz.
    Thompson, Mrs. Law.
    Trein, Lieut. Charles
    Ursula, Sister Mary
    Uhl, Mrs. Russell
    VanHorn, Mrs. W. R.
    Vincentia, Sister Mary
    Vivian, Verda
    VanHoesen, Leyl
    Wilfred, Sister Mary
    Walsh, Mary
    Wheatley, Helen
    Walsh, Rose
    Weathers, Mildred
    Walsh, Anna V.
    Wagner, Emma C.
    Wintersteen, Nan
    Williams, Mrs. Minnie
    Wilkes, Margaret
    Winters, Gwyn
    Wilkes, Blanche
    Womelsdorf, Goldie
    Williams, Olwen
    Williams, Lenore
    Williams, Elizabeth
    Wolfe, Oliver L.
    Washington, Jeannette
    Wilson, Sarah
    William, Sister Mary
    Williams, May
    Wright, Ernest W.
    Williamson, Mrs. J. P.
    Woodward, Mrs. J. B.
    Waller, Mrs. C. B.
    Williams, Sarah L.
    Williams, Laura
    Winchester, Mrs. B. B.
    Williams, Kate
    Williams, Grace
    Weckesser, Marion
    Walker, Jennie
    Wildermuth, Edith
    Yanalewicz, Anna
    Young, Helen
    Yaple, John Q.
    Yetter, Mrs. H. W.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




Transcriber’s note:

    ○ On page 42 there is a missing reference to another page in this
      document.

    ○ In the table of expenses some of the grand totals were folded into
      the right-most column to keep the line within the page width.

    ○ Missing or obscured punctuation was silently corrected.

    ○ Typographical errors were silently corrected.

    ○ Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation were made consistent only
      when a predominant form was found in this book.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SPANISH INFLUENZA PANDEMIC OF
1918***


******* This file should be named 64785-0.txt or 64785-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/4/7/8/64785


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

